Is the strength of American democracy its capacity to make repairable mistakes? 

For some, global politics can be seen as the clash of two different ideologies and forms of maintaining government. From the ‘battle’ of the USSR and the USA to China against the US, one question remains – why has democracy endured throughout history? One can trace the answer to the writings of the French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville and what he believed to be the peculiar paradox of the American democratic experiment – how he believes that American democracy is strong due to a variety of reasons, not least of its ability to make repairable mistakes. In scoping out this argument, I draw from Tocqueville’s book Democracy in America, examining how the ideology of equality permeates everyday life, creating a democratic fervour that pushes people to participate in democracy and undermines revolution. Then, I look at the democratic system itself: how democracy remains adaptable and stable even through the actions of ‘bad actors’ and how democracy prepares democracy for war. These two factors, I would argue, help make an energetic democratic way of life that helps push for social change and minimize the effects of long-lasting consequences in democracy. Then I address the other side of the argument, that the equality that Tocqueville describes is too optimistic – that actors can undermine the spirit of equality. Then, I go back to Tocqueville, examining volume two of his text: his warnings of this ideal towards equality: the tendency for people in democratic societies to fall into banality. With this I would argue that American democracy is simply too unequal for Tocqueville’s argument to apply, and that it is quite idealistic to believe that democracy’s biggest strength is to make repairable mistakes. 

Tocqueville is a French aristocrat who travelled to America to study its penal system only to study the democratic way of life of the American people. It is worth noting, as I will cover later, the transition of his viewpoints on equality – the first volume is optimistic of democratic institutions whereas volume two is more pessimistic in democracy’s sustainability. 

A central part of Tocqueville’s argument was that equality as an ideal is one that seeps straight into the American way of life. For him, people believed in democracy in a religious sense, and they devoted themselves to that ideal as they believed in its success. The premise of equality dictated that people believed and participated in elections – if a party fails, there will always be a chance for the ‘loser’ to end up on the winning side next election. This imbues a frantic energy into the American way of life that mobilizes action. As Runciman summarizes, “There is a kind of hysteria around American elections … then the election happens and either this candidate or that candidate wins and … life goes on.” (2021, 87). As long as people believe in this equality of opportunity, then democracy is unlikely to end up in civil war. This democratic fever encourages people to make political actions to change their lives – from attending political assemblies, to creating political assemblies, to discussing and organizing events to discuss government action. This is the true advantage of democracy – it's ability to “spread a restive activity through the whole social body … [that] can bring forth marvels.” (1835, 263). The power of democracy in interesting people into the fate of their governments is one advantage that other political systems can arguably hardly live up to. 

American democracy encourages people to get involved in democratic life yet at the same time its political institutions appear to work against itself – democracy can elect bad, arrogant and contemptuous leaders. Tocqueville has an answer for this. He points at the fact that: 

“Those charged with directing the affairs of the public … can therefore commit frequent infidelities, but they will never … follow a tendency hostile to that majority; and they cannot succeed in impressing [a] … dangerous style on the government … the bad administration … is an isolated fact that has influence only for the short duration of that administration” (1835, 254). 

In other words, because of the frenetic speed of democracy, the actions of any one person are limited: people in power are too ambitious to cooperate and should their views come contrary to the majority, they will not come into power – or rather, even should they come into power, their influence is scarcely felt. The ability of democracy to induce energy into the people makes them uncomplacent with ‘bad actors’, enabling these bad actors to be washed away. This helps democracies to experiment and make mistakes. This, Tocqueville argues, enables their success in long wars – as Runciman yet again summarizes, “they [Democracy] keeps shuffling their military leaders until they find ones who are up to the challenge … not hung up on tradition and reputation” (2013, 28) 

This love towards the ideal of equality reduces the chance for democracies to revolt. As people end up possessing private property, they in turn gain a disinclination towards revolution – they love stability and dislike taking risks that cause them to lose private property. In turn, this turns any individual away from the revolutionary ideas - “when conditions are almost alike, one man does not easily allow himself to be persuaded by another … it becomes more difficult for an innovator … to exercise great power over the mind of a people.” (1835, 605). At the time of writing Tocqueville’s book (1835), America had only survived one long term internal war - the American War of Independence (1775-1783), an incredibly bloody and terrifying affair. Tocqueville too witnessed the French revolution (1789-1799). For many readers, the dangers of civil war would remain ever potent. The disinclination towards revolution thereby could present an argument that the own institutions of democracy help prevent democratic systems from making irreparable mistakes that threaten to destroy industry, commerce and stability. In a sense, equality imbues people with reluctance to revolt since they simply have more to lose. 

But let’s turn our attention to the wording of the question - irreparable mistakes. To what degree is a mistake reparable or irreparable? It is true that democracies are generally more peaceful than other political systems of governance – as Runciman states, “the structure of democratic politics … makes democratic politicians wary of needless conflicts … interests that have to be aligned.” (2013, 305-306). However, it cannot be argued that the wars democracies do pick end up working to the benefit of either country. As Tocqueville argued, bad leaders must convince the public to pursue actions against their interest. Warfare however has changed since Tocqueville’s time - “Democracies … find themselves engaged in military conflicts being conducted away from the public glare … the institutional barriers … for war can result in bypassing the public instead of bypassing the war.” (ibid, 306). If the public doesn’t understand the potential ramifications of war, then they may be less likely to protest it. At the same time, leaders can lie to the public about wars. In the 2000s, it is held that the George Bush, the president of the US, and Tony Blair, prime minister of the U.K, lied about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and in so justified the Iraq as a means of dealing with this incredibly volatile threat. Arguably then, there could be an issue of asymmetrical information – leaders can take actions that are against the public interest as they hold the information. This could easily lead to democracies making irreparable mistakes in conducting war when it was not needed. Therefore, there is a vast moral hazard in the creation of wars or how it is presented that can cost finance, time and human lives. 

That said, the growth of the digital age could present an argument that this has made the democratic system more transparent. News corporations are, at this time of writing, sending ‘in the field’ information about the current Gaza conflict. In real time, we can see updates on the conflict, the death toll, the personal testimonies of victims of said event. There are less barriers to information than ever before and arguably then politicians who mislead could be subsequently dealt with. But this idea is flawed on two accounts: firstly, it implies that there is a singular truth in an accurate depiction of foreign affairs without considering how other state apparatus such as the news can influence our beliefs. Baudrillard, a French postmodernist, saying that “the gulf war did not take place” is instrumental in arguing my point: questioning rather if we are viewing the war in its true objective reality, or a simulacrum, potentially biased in favour of who is transmitting the news. Additionally, it ignores the fact that democratic systems in the US are not as equal as Tocqueville had imagined. John Dunn points out that whilst democracy has won a near-global monopoly on how nation-states should be run at the same time to view democracy as a wholly positive force that ‘triumphed’ over other systems risks ignoring: 

“the direct link between adjudication and coercion in defining what a state is. It thinks away …. the vast chasm of power and wealth between different populations … it sets aside … the factors which have caused it to win.” (2013, 161) 

If we take the rosy view Tocqueville had in volume 1 of his book, then we risk ignoring how democracy was coerced onto people. In doing so, we risk viewing democracy as completely in the people’s interest and the ideal of equality as all-encompassing: inequalities do exist, and there is a huge amount of doubt whether political systems can truly be democratic. Additionally, modern democracy is fundamentally alienating – a system of “choosing under highly constrained circumstances the relatively small number of their fellows who … will choose for them.” (ibid, 149). It might be worth considering then the ideas of Benjamin Constant (1768-1830) in the two different types of liberty: how ancient liberty, freedom to participate in politics, cannot be reconciled with modern liberty, liberty to hold a private life. Although both authors, Tocqueville and Constant, were writing in the same time, it might be worth considering if Tocqueville’s ideas are long since outdated – if we cannot have the democratic energy that enables people to create political action, then arguably there is insurmountably harder for people to stop politicians from making irreparable mistakes in the economy. 

Finally, what ultimately might be the biggest boon of democracy – its tendency towards equality – might in turn be its biggest downfall. To this, we can view the second volume of Democracy in America, written five years after the first publication. In the first volume, Tocqueville is aware of the looming issue of the ‘tyranny of the majority’ - the idea that populism can run wild, and the will of the majority can impose itself on the few. To see the possible issues of that, we can turn to the history of lynching in the US. Rather, what we should turn to is the idea that democracy can turn banal. One tendency that runs in the US is that of conformity – if citizens become too comfortable in democracy, then we become prey to the actual tyrants. As Tocqueville says, “If citizens continue to confine themselves … they will become almost inaccessible to those great and powerful public emotions that trouble people.” (1835, 607). 

In conclusion, it is unwise to suggest that American democracy’s biggest strength is its ability to make reparable mistakes. Not only does this downplay the dangers of actions taken by politicians (referring to the Iraq war), but it also downplays the fact that politicians or hegemonic forces can distort information that might have long lasting impacts on American democracy. For example, you can view this considering the January 6th, 2021, capitol attack and how nationalistic sentiments and false accusations of election tampering can result in presidential actors still having an immense impact on politics despite being out of power. There are some issues not raised in this essay: for example, issues of climate change, how democracies can be slow to fix those mistakes, or the potential volatility of short-term crises such as the 2008 financial crisis that can constitute long lasting effects unable to be washed away with time. 

Bibliography 

Dunn, J. (2005) Setting the people free: the story of democracy (London: Atlantic), ch. 4. 

Glazer, N. (2000) ‘Race and ethnicity in America’, (Journal of Democracy, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 95-102) 

Holmes, S. (1995) ‘Tocqueville and democracy’ in the idea of democracy, David Copp, Jean Hampton and John E. Roemer eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Runciman, D. (2021) Confronting Leviathan, London: Profile Books 

Runciman, D. (2013) The confidence trap: a history of democracy in crisis from the First World War to the present (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Tocqueville, A. Democracy in America (London: Fontana Press, 1994). vol 1, part I, chs 3-6; part II, chs. 1, 4, 6-10: vol. 2, part II, chs. 1, 5-9, 13; part III, 21-26; part IV, chs. 1-8