
What does this question posit? That without violence, we would be living in the state of nature, a term borrowed from Hobbes (1651), with no central authority or government to protect us? As history shows, nations-states will continually form and be discarded; it's no question therein that violence and conflict creates a nation-state. No, what is the more interesting question here is what is being implied: that violence helps ensure a state's longevity. If we were to take a Hobbesian outlook, we could argue that violence or the *threat* of violence creates stability under the state, but such a topic is beyond the scope of this essay. What is more pressing is the concern as to whether this immense state is capable of withstanding the violence issued to it by *other* states. I'd argue that throughout history, violence - whether in self-defence or in pursuit of other gains - ensures that a state remains standing against rival states. I will trace this essay through the violence wrought in the 30 years war and how that culminated in the Peace of Westphalia, commonly seen as a treaty that precluded the modern sovereign state. I will also trace it through the East Asian Tribute system, analysing whether even 'contemporaries' of the Western anarchic system are peaceful in design. I will counterpose these arguments with theories that the dominance of the nation-state formed not out of violence, but imitation, as seen in Henrick's *The Sovereign State and Its Competitors* (1996) before ultimately concluding that in all of these circumstances, violence still precluded the background of these states. Ultimately, the world and nation-states are run through violence, and you can not take the violence out of the history of international relations.

Let's start this essay with the Thirty Years' War between 1618 to 1648. Many scholars, such as David Boucher, would levy the argument that the Peace of Westphalia, two peace treaties signed in October 1648 to bring about the end of the Thirty Years' War, "provided the foundation for, and gave formal recognition to the modern state system in Europe" (1998: p. 289). Indeed, it is a popular theory among International Relation theorists that the Peace of Westphalian helped to create the modern sovereign state, theorists such as Seyom Brown arguing for the "Westphalian Principles" codified in 1648 - this being that " (1) the government of each country is unequivocally sovereign within its territorial jurisdiction, and (2) countries shall not interfere in each other's domestic affairs." (1992, p. 74). There are those, such as Leo Gross, who'd even go as far to say as "Westphalia ... marks the end of an epoch and the opening of another ... the majestic portal which leads from the old into the new world" (1948: p. 28). With all of these theorists, historians and scholars arguing that the Peace of Westphalia introduced the core concept of the modern, sovereign state, could we see then argue that the physical violence wrought by the Thirty Years' War *created* the long-lasting modern nation-state as we see today? It's worth noting that any argument that states have a history of violence is a rather simplistic argument: of course all states have engaged in war and conflict. My argument here is that the outbreak of violence *forced* the core concept of the nation-state to emerge.

The Thirty Years' War was a bloody and deadly affair, and Andreas Osiander would put forth the argument that simply "what sustained [the war] was expansionist aggression by other actors ... conflict through deliberate planning"  (2001: p. 260) - in other words, an attainment of means and ends, for France, to "ruin the house of Austria completely ... to profit from its dismemberment" (Richelieu 1997, 518-20), and perhaps for the Danish king, fear "that the emperor would threaten Swedish domination of the Baltic." (Osiander, 2001: p. 260). This messy concoction of war, violence and the increasing number of political actors in this conflict, made, as Beaulac would put it simply, "the violent solution of the situation virtually inevitable ... which is said to be the most destructive armed conflict in Europe until the 20th century" (Beaulac, 2000: p. 160). Really, it's no surprise then that given such an extensive war, dominated by power politics, all parties would eventually decide to enter negotiations from 1644 to 1648, culminating in the Peace of Westphalia as we know it and "without any decisive victory by anyone" (Beaulac, 2000: p. 161). In this vein, if violence precipitated the Thirty Years' War, then perhaps the root of the modern nation-state could be seen *through* violence.

The works of Charles Tilly would stretch this argument further, claiming mainly not only is the history of the modern nation-state surrounded by violence, but that "any state that failed to put considerable effort into war making was likely to disappear" (1985: 184), bringing forth this Darwinian view that only states who are adept at the four uses of organized violence are liable to survive. For him, those would be war making (the process of destroying rival states outside domestic territories), state making (destroying rivals within their territory), protection (destroying enemies of their clients) and extraction - the ability to finance the prior three activities. Could we then apply this vastly simplified model to the complex politics of Westphalia: attributing labels of war making to those of France and the Dutch, to state making to the Habsburg, noted by Osiander to "not want this war ... not threaten[ing] the independence of other actors ... outside the empire"? (2001: p.260)

But this is a very misguided view. As many scholars, such as Stephanie Beaulac would argue, it is a misconception to believe that the Peace of Westphalia is a treaty that introduced the concept of the modern sovereign state. Rather, he'd argue that "the Peace of Westphalia does not constitute a paradigm shift in the development of our state system." (2000: p. 175), suggesting rather that "these Treaty articles merely recognised a practice which had already been in existence for almost half a century" where the main purposes of these treaties were "related to the practice of religion and the settlement of territories" - that at Article 5, Paragraph 11, "a ruler who chose to change its religion could not compel its subjects to do the same", ensuring a form of private liberty with religious freedom. Any argument that the Peace of Westphalia introduced the concept of sovereignty in states can't be backed up historically, as Beaulac would argue - "the powerful German Princes were conducting their own foreign policy long before Westphalia" (2000: p. 168), indicating rather that these German princes were already behaving in a sovereign-like manner long before these treaties. Therefore then, if the Peace of Westphalian did not spawn these new sovereign modern nation-states, then what use does it have in exploring the role and fear of violence in creating said states? 

Moreover, whereas theorists like Charles Tilly would put forth the argument that states are born out of violence and war-making, Spruyt would point out a contrary observation. Indeed, as Osiander would argue, "... even before the twentieth century European actors hardly ever ceased exist because of military defeat ... any European actors destroyed because they were unable to defend themselves before the French revolution." (1998: p. 278). Spruyt (1944) suggested that the rise of the nation-state was more inclined due to social factors, pointing predominantly at economic and social processes rather than warfare. He points out that "the prevalent view that war is the all-decisive selective mechanism needs to be amended" (1944: p. 178), looking instead at areas of "institutional arrangement" - problems of "rationalizing their economies", "reducing transaction costs" and most interestingly, mimicry as "Sovereign actors only recognised particular types of actors as legitimate players ... engaged in institutional learning" (ibid: p. 178-179). What he argues is that rulers simply chose systems through "mutual empowerment", mimicking successful states. As he argues, "evolution is adaptation, not progress" - the fact that the state was chosen was primarily because of its economic "efficiency" (ibid: p. 178). With this viewpoint in mind, it could be argued that inherently violence doesn't need to create the nation-state.

However, what both arguments lack is a non-Eurocentric gaze. The idea of the nation-state, seen through this lens, is a vastly western perspective. Could we then identify how violence flows through foreign states, such as those of Asian origin?

We can look at no other than the East-Asian tributary system for this. David Kang describes the tributary system as "involving in particular a hierarchic rank ordering based on status ... explicitly hierarchic" (2010: p. 593-594) with "China [as] the hegemon, and ranking derived from cultural achievement and social recognition by other political actors" (ibid). To put it simply, it's a system wherein other states must recognize Confucian ideals, and accept China as the hegemony. This system provided legitimacy to the states that recognized these ideals. According to Kang, compared to the Westphalian system, the tributary system is "enduring, stable and hierarchic": not based on violence, such as the "balance of power" seen in the West, where state powers are counterbalanced through each other, but instead a "hierarchic position" (2010: p. 594). For him, this system resulted in "a long peace", with China having "no need to fight and the secondary power no desire to fight" (ibid: p. 602). Charles Tilly's conception of the nation-state having to undergo a Darwinian state of conflict doesn't apply here: these nations aren't inherently competitive, "China actually did have the material and logistical capabilities to conquer Korea if it wanted ... these states had the capacity to do so on a massive scale that, "easily dwarfed those of their European contemporaries"" (ibid: p. 615), it just chose not to. Under this different political system where nation states survived in lieu of violence, it could be argued then that violence is not a prerequisite to the longevity of the nation state.

We must however consider the author's bias in what information he considers to be important or not. Kang downplays the violence and war that the Chinese state underwent with, suggesting that it "tended to occur between China and the semi-nomadic people on its northern and western borders" (ibid: p. 593) and not within these Sinicized states that accepted these Confucian values. It's as though it was the nomads who were at fault for not accepting Chinese hegemon - "They [the nomads] rejected Confucian ideas of civilization such as written texts or settled", the implication thereof is that this tributary system would've worked perfectly and without violence should the Nomads play the same "game" as the other Sinicized states (ibid: p. 618-19), and therefore this system would've worked without violence. Yuan-Kang Wang, a Taiwanese scholar, argues the contrary: that "military force has been crucial to establishing, maintaining, and enforcing the tribute system" (2010: p. 146). As he argues later, "those who accepted Chinese supremacy were granted tributary trade privileges; those who did not ... were defined as inhuman, therefore deserving extermination ... the iron fist always was held in reserve behind the smooth ritual mask." (ibid: p. 149), keeping these vassal states in check and forcing them to subscribe to these Chinese ideals. Of course, there were other reasons that states submitted to China - namely reasons of trade, Chinese investiture, security that ultimately made it profitable for inferior nations to seek trade with China but ultimately what lay behind the mask of Chinese authority was coercion, and as the central argument of this essay - the threat of violence. As Kang says, "Distant empires ... with some power ... were able to keep their independence" where "Lesser states submitted to Chinese authority ... because they did not have better alternatives. Relative weakness, geographic proximity and a lack of a counterbalancing ally forced them to accept Chinese dominance." In the end, Imperial China behaved just like any other western state - in an attempt to survive, "when China adopted a defensive posture" it was due to "insufficient offensive capabilities" and when applicable, "Chinese decision makers frequently probed for weakness ... and took advantage when found" (183-184). In this regard, violence is inherent in ensuring a state's longevity, and is an integral part of history: China used violence to obtain resources, such as when the Ming Emperor Hongwu in 1397 threatened invasion to the small state of Srivijava in case of noncompliance. Perhaps we can then apply Charles Tilly's theory of the war-making - could it be then that China's coercive actions in war-making, threatening smaller states and forcing submission create this state?

In conclusion, I agree with the sentiment that without violence, there would be no nation state. From analysing the causes of the Peace of Westphalia, and concluding that at least *some* basis of the modern sovereign system was conducted out of a fear of conflict and bloodshed to the Tributary system in China, and realising therein that violence is intertwined with those systems, with China exerting violence to retain its supremacy, it's clear that states use and subscribe to violence to further their own ends. It's key for the state-nation's longevity that violence must be performed: in either self-defence, as in the case of the Habsburg, or ruthless competition in the case of Imperial China. In the end, you simply can't bring violence out of the state.