This is part of the [[Class and Inequality]] series:
[[Skeggs]] B (2005) The Making of Class and Gender through Visualizing Moral Subject Formation. Sociology 39(5): 965–982
12-01-24

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/epdf/10.1177/0038038505058381
# The Making of Class and Gender through Visualizing Moral Subject Formation
## Article Introduction

>[!abstract]
>This article explores how white working-class women are figured as the constitutive limit – in proximity – to national public morality. It is argued that four pro-cesses: increased ambivalence generated by the reworking of moral boundaries; new forms of neo-liberal governance in which the use of culture is seen as a form of personal responsibility by which new race relations are formed; new ways of investing in one’s self as a way of generating exchange-value via affects and display; and the shift to compulsory individuality are reshaping class relations via the making of the self. By showing and telling themselves in public white working-class women are forced to display their ‘lack’ of moral value according to the symbolic values generated by the above processes. It is a no-win situation for them unless we shift our perspective from exchange-value to use-value 

As time goes on, the focus of what is considered a national evil has shifted from the single working mother to the 'hen party' - a threat to comfort, ontological security, and jeopardized the entitlement to hard fought-for gay space.

The hens were variously framed by associations of contagion, pollution, distaste and excess heterosexuality - even in a radicalized gay sexualized space, their heterosexuality could not be tolerated because their tasteless, loud, vulgar display made them intolerable.

The most recent focus on eating and drinking adds to the 1990s government health pathologizing concern with mothers who smoke. These fat programmes predominantly expose working-class families, especially mothers, as incapable of knowing how to look after themselves and others, as irresponsible.

"The significance of all this media interest in that white working-class women in particular are being marked as the national constitutive limit to propriety - an act which repeats moments of crisis in authority condensed and symbolically figured through the excess of the grotesque, weeping, leaking, excreting bodies of working-class women." (968) ... "the excessive, unhealthy, publicly immoral white working-class woman, I argue, epitomizes the zeigeist of the moment - a crisis in middle-class authority and security,  epitomized in the output of TV, concretized in criminal law (Garland, 2000) and a handy figure for the government to deflect its cuts in welfare provision via the identification of a 'social problem.'" (968)

The proliferation of her representation is an attempt to reconstruct the boundaries of regulation and order and legitimate various forms of external state control and mechanisms of self-governance via the transfer of self-responsibility.

This article is separated into four categories:
1. First is an exploration how our knowledge of moral boundaries is changing
2. Second is a redrawing of moral boundaries
3. Culture can propertied in the making of the middle-class self, a process enabled through the historical possessive individual
4. These new forms of subjectivity destabilise traditional authority whilst offering ways of reclaiming authority, but not without challenge.

This article comes to class analysis: disputes the debate that class is in decline and rather suggests that "class is so insinuated in the intimate making of self and culture that it is even more ubiquitous than previously articulated, if more difficult to pin down, leaking beyond the traditional measures of classification." (969)

Additionally, it suggests a reversal of Marx, moving beyond the economic, into understanding value more generally to understand how class if made through cultural values premised on morality.

## A collection of key ideas from the article

### Ambivalence, Affect and Mortality

Arenas which were once consigned to the state-regulated moral sphere are used to open up new markets - the prior historical separation of femininity from sexuality is being recombined.

```ad-quote
title: (969)
*Sexy in the City* ... becomes a perfect example of how cult TV (HBO) Breaks new markets by breaking old boundaries, as does *The L Word* (Sky) in which glamour is systematically associated with lesbianism. In these programmes issues that were once the preserve of radical post-feminist performance art (such as Anne Sprinkle's displays of female ejaculation) are mainstreamed, as are previously unspoken issues, such as discussions about the taste of male semen (*Sex in the City*)
```

The repetitive proliferation, cataloguing and categorizing of speaking the unspoken alerts [[Michel Foucault|Foucaldians]] of a crisis: the expansion of excessive hetero-sexuality from one class to another generates uncertainty about the good/bad moral value.


```ad-quote
title: 969
"The historical location of the immoral with the white and black working-class women as the site of sexual agency and contagion, is now in the contemporary extended into the category of the professional white middle-class urban women. The boundaries of the lascivious, dangerous and contagious are therefore no longer absolutely clear."

```

For while black and white middle-class women become sites for the display of overt and excessive heterosexuality, white and black working-class women remain sexual objects; cleaved by respectability ... the extension of sexuality creates ambivalence, a dislodging of certainty, a potential crisis in ontological security and a disruption of secure boundary knowledge. (Bauman) (970)

Ambivalence of distinguishing good from bad:
- Bhabha (1996) notes that proximity that produces difference: it is the "proximate stranger who is not as easily identifiable, so she is made so. She is therefore represented to such an extent that nobody could fail to recognize her and her lack of moral value. She is transformed into a recognizable figure: the figure of the constitutive moral limit in proximity. (970)
- This figure has to be easily recognizable
- The monstrous representation used to assuage concerns about ambivalence and proximity is central to theories of disgust. Disgust is an effective response to monstrosity. When someone is designated as excessive, immoral, disgusting and so on, it provides collective reassurance that we are not alone in our judgement of the disgusting object, generating consensus for middle-class standards, maintaining the symbolic order. (970)
- "The desire to mimic, emulate, attach and use the disposition of the disgusting can be seen in recent affect stripping: a process whereby affects are detached from the body of production."
- Affect is also put to use by groups making political claims; the use of the claim of injury and trauma by groups mobilizing identity politics - (Berlant (2000) - "US personhood is now shaped through the imperative for the citizen to display trauma; displacing everyday suffering for high-impact affect ... [but] working-class women are more likely to refuse victim-hood, cover up injury and endure to display that they can cope (Skeggs, 1997) (971)


### State Regulation

National state regulation is disrupted and reformed with some groups opened out for the market ...

```ad-quote
"the rhetoric surrounding the race riot in the north of England in 2001 consistently portrayed the white working class as racist, useless, pointless and a blockage to global modernity, a functioning figuring that allows the middle class to position themselves as a vanguard of cosmopolitan modernity and draw divisions between different forms of whiteness: pure and dirty white, thereby disrupting the order of white privilege. The rhetoric reveals that whiteness does not naturally predispose people to social privilege and success while making the figural association between black and working class disappear. (Haylett, 2001) (972)
```


### Extraordinary Subjectivity, Compulsory individuality

```ad-quote
title: 973
"These processes of boundary re-drawing, affect stripping, neo-liberal governance, political claims-making and propertizing would singularly simply operate as differences within their fields of markets, governance and law, but the cumulative force of their connections can be seen most obviously when we explore how they cohere in the current imperatives to subjectivity."
```

We are in a period of what Dovey identifies as "extraordinary subjectivity" - a shift from grand narratives as the basis for truth to statements that the world no longer has purchase unless grounded in the personal, the subjective or the particular.

It is up to the individual to 'choose' their repertoire of the self - if they do not have the range of narratives and discourses for the production of the ethical self, they are held responsible for choosing badly a production for themselves.

Rose (1989) describes how the vocabulary, grammars of conduct proliferate across the practices of everyday life and exert a presence in everyday conversation.

"The imperative to produce oneself through resourcing dilemmas relies not just on *access to* and control of symbolic resources, but also on knowing *how* to display one's subjectivity properly. (973)"  For instance, working class telling themselves in highly specific ways to receive welfare for narratives with redemption and respectability instructed by legal interlocutors. This is forced subjectivity told by the powerful. 

If the self does not tell itself correctly, it displays 'diseases of the will' - failures of responsible self-control by those who do not know how to behave. Sedgwick and France identify two forms of bad-will behaviour: non-consensual and conduct that is excessive.

These twin pathologies define the limits in which plurality and exercise of the will may be tolerated - the ethically complete self is imperative, displayed as a sign of one's social responsibility. "The reality TV shows display 'bad selves' - those who do not know how to tell properly and show that they cannot operate an ethical self ... subjectivities out of control, beyond propriety, excessive." (974)

"Choice does not merely represent a pre-formed self imbued with potential, but a performative enactment of self; one that only some can perform. Others do not have access to 'choice', all they can display is 'lack'; lack of access to the techniques for telling themselves and lack of access to the right culture; they cannot perform the good self because they do not have the cultural resources to do so." (974)

In all, this creates political claims and this focus on choice, ethics and responsibility which visualise bad choice, bad selves and no value create the conditions in which associations between social groups and moral values are being realigned. Class relations are being made through this process. (974)

## Fighting Back

Those who are positioned to make judgements of other's subjectivity are continually de-authorized by those who are positioned to be judged. Working class attacks on the boring middle class, institutionalized in the term 'mockney' used to apply to those like Jamie Oliver, Guy Ritchie who embodies the working-class language and other cultural aspect. The attack on the middle class comes from itself a desire not to be pretentious.

The ubiquitous critique of pretensions in European culture may be why the middle class respondents of [[Mike Savage]]'s survey found a desire to be ordinary - a way of evading hierarchy and privilege in relationship to tohers. 

## Conclusion

"Property is determined as a set of entitlements, which are exclusive to an own er, or to the holder of the proprietary interest. Exclusion from, and access to, objects, people and practice to propertize, are central to both the formation of middle-class subjectivity ... and the exclusion from recognizable worth, that is, proper personhood." (977) 

This relationship of entitlement and exclusion is the basis for cultural exchange in which new forms of exploitations are shaped, but value is misrecognised in this process. We need to move then to use-value - allowing us to understand how those who shape their subjectivity may do so from a different value system, one that does not rely on the working class being positioned as the moral constitutive limit to bourgeois respectability. (977-978)