[[The Leviathan]]
### Why according to Hobbes should subjects obey the sovereign?

The question of political legitimacy - that is, the belief of how far and in what scenario a subject should obey the authority or not - has run through the history of political thought for centuries. Whilst tracing these theories is, of course, the subject of another essay, it is worth understanding and examining Hobbes's theory and seeing just how far his theory around political obligation can be applied to the modern-day state. In this essay, I will outline and explain Hobbes's belief in the state and the sovereign: the extent of political power a sovereign may hold, and why the subject, in their best interests, should both create and obey the sovereign, relating it to Hobbes's core brutal belief in human nature and the context of his environment, and how that played a part in the beliefs written in *The Leviathan*. I will describe *when* the subject should disobey the sovereign, and outline several arguments as to how Hobbes's theory can be scrutinized under a modern gaze, summing up the question that should really be asked here: when, according to Hobbes's or plain reason altogether, should subjects *disobey* the Sovereign.

A central core part of Hobbes's argument that must be clarified before we delve into the nature of the sovereign is his belief in human nature. Although Hobbes has many optimistic leanings as we will discover later, the core of his feelings towards human nature is that of upmost pessimism. As many will know, Hobbes's titular philosophy is that human life, in the state of nature will be "nasty, brutish, short" (Leviathan, i. xiii. 9). But how does he come to this conclusion, and what is meant by the state of nature?

For Hobbes, the state of nature is the state of war - the state of humankind without the presence of a political authority, a state of permanent fear led by the notion of equality: fundamentally, for Hobbes's analysis, all humans are equal in their ability to kill each other. 

As noted in chapter XIII of the *Leviathan*, Hobbes believes that:
"Nature hath made men so equal in the facilities of body and mind ... when all is reckoned together the difference between man and man is not so considerable ... the weakest has strength enough to kill the strongest." (p.76, ibid)

This is a central problem for Hobbes. As all men have an 'equality of ability' (pp. 76, ibid) they possess an 'equality of hope' (pp. 76) in obtaining their goals. This can lead to conflict between these humans through three separate causes: competition, diffidence and glory. Competition arises when two parties undergo conflict for the same gain, diffidence resulting from self-defence for acts of violence and finally glory - conflict between men for reputation. The idea that humans have this mutual destructive power creates a notion of fear. In this state of nature, or for Hobbes - war - this constant fear and brutality leads to human civilization not progressing. He warns that:

"In such condition there is no place for industry, because the fruit thereof is uncertain: and consequently no culture of the earth; no navigation, nor use of the commodities that may be imported by sea; no commodious building; no instruments of moving and removing such things as require much force; no knowledge of the face of the earth; no account of time; no arts; no letters; no society; and which is worst of all, continual fear, and danger of violent death" (pp 78, ibid)

To summarise, when men differ on the values of right and wrong, in their judgement, in their goals, Hobbes believes "arise[s] Disputes, Controversies, and at last War." (pp 98, ibid).

So what is Hobbes solution to this dilemma?

Hobbes argues that if our concepts of right and wrong are inherently dynamic, that our moral philosophy is relative, a product of our 'appetites and aversions' (pg 98), the only plausible solution to reconcile our multitude of opinions and beliefs is to construct the Leviathan, an artificial human. As Richard Tuck paraphrases it (2002, *Very Short Introduction to Hobbes*), we must obtain the consent of a third party to make the necessary judgement about what threats are posed to the people, constructing a social construct wherein we imbue and give away our individual rights to.

In this society, the sovereign rules through fear and nigh-unlimited power - the consequences of breaking the laws, that being death, exile and more, is simply too high to even consider doing so. And in doing so, peace is maintained in civil society as all submit to the will of the sovereign, creating unity.

To the average observer, this view is considerably authoritarian, with its heavy emphasis on fear and oppression springing to mind of contemporary authoritarian states. So why does Hobbes insist on this system of politics so dearly?

One potential viewpoint could be linked to Hobbes' own background. Hobbes himself lived through the English civil war between 1642 - 1649 and through an unstable commonwealth thereafter. The sheer death and calamity he experienced could point as to why Hobbes believed that obeying the sovereign is vital rather than risk incurring civil war. But does this hold up today? 

Certainly, the civil war within the Democratic Republic of Congo amassed a brutal massacre where an "estimated 3.9 million people had died since 1998, arguably making DR Congo the world's deadliest crisis since World War II." (International Rescue Committee) and the politics of today is certainly fractious to the point where even the possibility of unity on certain topics seems unlikely. One only needs to watch CNN's Crossfire 'debates' to understand how fragmented online discourse, and unlikely the possibility of reconciling these beliefs can truly be.

This is the problem, as David Runciman (2013, The Oxford Handbook of Hobbes), would argue: that the problem with the state of nature is the principle that people in said state are free to interpret these natural laws as they see fit - they decide what is injustice. Without the strength of a sovereign, their word as law, then ultimately this clash of opinions, justice and wrongs must cause us to be into conflict of each other. 

As Runciman (2013, ibid) would argue:

"All individuals in the state of nature can agree to is that they would be better off leaving it, and thus they must abide by the convenient."

All men, if they were to use their reason, would come to understand these self-evident laws of nature, these precepts that incline one another to peace, and in doing so, understand that the best possible way to undergo harmony, is to give up your freedoms. As Hobbes puts it, without a sovereign, 'there is a dominion of passions, war, fear, poverty, slovenliness, solitude, barbarism, ignorance, cruelty' whereas with an all-power sovereign, there is 'the dominion of reason, peace, security, riches, decency, society, elegancy, sciences and benevolence.' (De Cive, chapter 10).

Another viewpoint could make do with personal liberty. Runciman writes that a common misconception with Hobbes is his link to totalitarianism: but in fact, "It's not totalitarian," (Confronting Leviathan, pp. 24) and that it is "absolutionism" (ibid, pp. 25), arguing that in this Leviathan state, the sovereign state will not be able to dictate every section of your life - it is simply impossible. Hobbes believes that in the gaps of the law, deemed to be the activities not detrimental to the safety of the Leviathan, "men have the liberty of doing what their own reasons shall suggest profitable to them." Arguably then, the real risk isn't that the sovereign state may encapsulate, destroy and control your life, but as Runciman again puts it: "You can never be sure that the sovereign won't suddenly decide that something that seemed to you to be your personal concern has become a threat of the state." (ibid, pp. 26).

The only part, Hobbes would argue, the subject can disobey the sovereign takes place when either the sovereign loses power or when the sovereign orders the subject to die. As Hobbes argues, "No man is bound by the words themselves, either to kill himself or any other man."" (Leviathan, pp. 134), and continuing on that if men sentenced to death were to defend each other, they have the liberty to do so, "for they but defend their lives, which the guilty man may as well do as the innocent" (ibid, pp. 135).

But can this argument around the sovereign's legitimacy really stand up to scrutiny? John Dunn writes that "one interesting limitation of Hobbes's sovereign is its claim that to possess a unitary will and judgement." (The history of political obligation, pp. 78). Facing constant global threats, such that of terrorism or global warming, one may be apt to argue that even in these areas, the sovereign may be paralyzed by inertia over this decision. Certainly then, if the sovereign fails its primary goal of 'protecting us' (Leviathan, pp. 135), what right do we have to obey it?

Additionally, there could be a problem with intelligence. As John Dunn writes, "As ... the range of disasters to human life was increased, then perhaps the holders of power don't have the intelligence, unity, or sagacity necessary to prevent these disasters." (The history of political obligation, pp. 79). Clearly, when faced with the tumultuous problems of the 21st century, there's a limit to the power a sovereign wield to protect us. So, to reiterate my last point, if a state fails to protect us, and fails to deal with the range of problems that we could understand as threatening human existence, then why should we give up our freedom and liberty to it?

If we were to take Hobbes' argument to the very limits, in order to guarantee harmony across the world we would "force states to conjoin [into a] "single world government" (ibid, pp. 79). But large organizations, as is typical with modern governments, are slow and lumbering to act within immediate crises. To give examples of times when governments had to elude bureaucracy in order to escape its bureaucracy, we can look at Eichmann - an official within the Nazi Party, an interesting figure the subject of another essay, - and how the Israel government, seeking to capture him for questioning as soon as possible, deployed an operation in Argentina to capture him without going through the appropriate channels. If taken to its extreme, if the artificial person of the state was to amass to that size, then we might see even the Leviathan struggle with such bureaucracy, as all actions and orders are fed through all channels leading to the sovereign. One could only imagine how much pressure that would put on said sovereign - whether that be a monarch, all the way to the assemblies of a democracy.

And finally, is the risk of a potential tyrannical government worth giving up our personal liberties for? If we were inclined to agree against any action that may incur civil war, then that potentially means us subjects falling victim to totalitarian regimes and governments. Although, as previously stated, there is a difference between totalitarian regimes and absolutism regimes (of which the Leviathan is the latter), obeying the laws of nature would risk incurring such a totalitarian system. In this case, when looking back at history at movements such as Stalinism, or even figures like Saddam Hussein, and what they deemed to be a breach of their personal safety, is it worth giving up our freedom for a system? Are we really able to do as what Hobbes said previously, activities 'profitable' to us?

Ultimately though, I am likened to agree with Dunn when he argues that, "Hobbes tried to derive comprehensive political obligation from nothing but expediency and rationality but he did not succeed." (ibid pp. 86-7). Hobbes' arguments aren't as self-evident as he claims. Despite that, his theory, and his reasoning as to why subjects should obey the sovereign, is still incredibly interesting - the focus on "human vulnerability", the implication thereof that consensus can *never* be reached in politics and, rationally leading on from that train of though, the idea to unify this divisiveness into the Sovereign will always remain to be a deeply profound and compelling argument.

---

References:

Thomas Hobbes, *Leviathan* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
Richard Tuck, *Hobbes* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989)
John Dunn, '*Political Obligation*' in *The History of Political theory and other essays* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996)
David Runciman, 'The sovereign' in *The Oxford handbook of Hobbes*'' (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013)
David Runciman, 'Confronting Leviathan' (London: Profile Books, 2021)
International Rescue Committee, *Mortality in the Democratic Republic of Congo: An ongoing crisis* lifted from https://www.rescue.org/report/mortality-democratic-republic-congo-ongoing-crisis