This is a deceptively complex question. Of course, we could use a plethora of definitions lifted from textbooks to understand what ethnography is, all of them ranging around the idea that ethnography is simply a 'qualitative research method in which a researcher ... studies a particular social/cultural group' (Sage Research Methods, 2023) but that is an incredibly broad definition. Rather, what the more pressing question is rather *what* ethnography is, and *why* do we conduct it in a specific manner pertaining to the anthropologist? There is a plurality of ideas on how people should study a social or cultural group, and that is a simply far more pressing debate. To explore this idea of the value of ethnography, I will trace my ideas through an Interpretivist theorist such as Clifford Geertz (1926-2005). I will study what, for him, social anthropology should encompass, and why therefore he insists on this interpretation of the ethnographic style. I will run through a series of criticisms of his Interpretivist approach, namely those who wrote of Writing Culture such Vincent Crapanzano (1939-present). Then, I will examine two other ethnographic texts: Anne Allison's (1950-present) *Nightwork : sexuality, pleasure, and corporate masculinity in a Tokyo Hostess Club.* (1994) and Audrey Richard's *Chisungu: A girls' initiation ceremony among the Bemba of Northern Rhodesia* (1956), understanding how the ethnographic style has changed since then and whether the criticisms still apply. I question finally whether that would change the value of ethnography has for studying minority cultures, ultimately then defining what ethnography is.

It might be curious as to why I've chosen Geertz to describe ethnography. After all, he wasn't the original pioneer of ethnography. I've chosen him specifically for his views on the study of culture, and how that, although flawed as we will see later, has ramifications for the the domain of ethnographic studies in the future. For instance, let's consider what he believes culture is.

For him:
	"The concept of culture ... is essentially a semiotic one ... man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has spun. I take culture to be those webs, and the analysis of it to be therefore not an experimental science in search of law but an interpretive one in search of meaning." (1973: pp. 311)

Many people would argue that the study of Anthropology needs to revolve around understanding the individual, the environment and the 'webs of significance' that spawns from man. We need to interpret his actions in relative to the culture he is surrounded within. To demonstrate this, he cites a term from Gilbert Ryle (1900-1976), differentiating between "thick description" and "thin description" - arguing that (in an example he used in regards to two boys winking at each other), "You can't wink ... without knowing what counts as winking or how, physically, to contract your eyelid ... but to draw from such truths the conclusion that knowing how to wink is winking" is paramount to "taking thin descriptions for thick." (ibid:, pp. 315) Thin description therefore is merely a description of a social behaviour whereas thick description incorporates context, allowing those, such as ethnographies, to interpret their culture. With this, and by developing a thick description of the studied and their culture, we can achieve our task of "[uncovering] the conceptual structure that informs our subjects' acts, the "said" of social discourse ... a system of analysis ... [providing] a vocabulary in which what symbolic action has to say about itself - that is, the role of culture in human life - can be expressed." (ibid, pp. 321).

There's no better way to illuminate how ethnography should be (in his terms) carried out than his own work, *Deep play: notes on the Balinese Cockfight* (2005). In this, we can see elements of his close interpretive ethnographic methodology. The essay itself starts with a recount of Geertz's arrival at the Balinese village with his wife, describing how they moved into a compound, and were ignored by the Balinese people - later on, when fleeing from the police who were trying to break up the occurring cockfight, Geertz and his wife were given shelter by some of the Balinese residents who covered for him. Thereon, he and his wife were recognised as residents, and the Balinese people were ready to welcome him into the community. The fundamentals of Geertz' approach to ethnography is is prominent here: the close and narrative format of his essay illustrates to the reader of the closeness of his relation to the Bali people, providing his work and subsequent analysis with legitimacy. From communing with these Bali people, Gertz is able to interpret their culture, understand the Bali people. Although a more thorough analysis of Geertz's interactions with the Bali village is beyond the scope of this essay, I will outline some of Geertz' findings from his ethnographic study: he outlines the structure of the cockfighting ring: its 'irrational' nature, that "men do engage in such play [deep play - when the stakes are so high it becomes irrational to engage in it] both passionately and often" (2005: 71), arguing that the incredibly high stakes are related to a struggle over status in Bali. He finds a distinction between "deep" and "thin" play - to put it simply, shallow play are ones wherein "smaller amounts of money are involved" and in deep play, "the amount of money are great, much more is at stake than material gain: namely, esteem, honour, dignity, respect." (Ibid). In his conclusion, he sets forth a grand conclusion that "In the cockfight ... the Balinese forms and discovers his temperament and his society's temper at the same time" (ibid: p. 85) and that "it is a Balinese reading of Balinese experience; a story they tell themselves about themselves." - a reflection of their societal values. He moves beyond a thin description of viewing the cockfighting as a societal tool, and creates a multi-faceted story of the Balinese people and their societal values in regards to honour, animality and so on. In doing so, perhaps this is what ethnography *should* be - a capture of the culture authentically and interpretively.

But naturally a more thorough examination of Geertz' study will reveal holes in his theory that will question whether we should use his work as a basis for how ethnographic research should be carried out. In Vincent Crapazano's essay - *Hermes' Dilemma: The Masking of Subversion in Ethnographic Description* (1986), Crapazano illustrates many problems with Geertz' approach to ethnography. For instance, that taking Geertz's word as fact obfuscates his own outsider, western imposition into the text. As noted, imposition here applies in multiple ways: firstly, that "the ethnographer does not recognise the provisional nature of his presentation" and thus "assumes a final interpretation" that does not accurately represent the culture (1986: p. 51).  Crapazano notes that Geertz likely wasn't trying to impose himself on the Bali people, that ethnographic studies such as his tend towards that: "the ethnographer is caught in a second paradox ... he must render the foreign familiar and preserve its very foreignness." (ibid: pp 52)  In a sense, we lose the authenticity and capability of the ethnography to properly depict it. Later in the essay, Crapazano deconstructs Geertz's study, arguing that this interpretive approach falls flat as long as Geertz keeps imposing his own values and beliefs on the Bali people: for instance, "for whom does the cockfight articulate everyday experience ... and make it more perceptible?"(ibid: p. 72) Namely, do the Balinese people think this themselves? Is this narrative account taking into perspective *their* ideas? Not to mention, when referring to this specific sect of people, he calls them in generalized terms: the "Balinese". There is a lot of doubt thereof as to whether this village accurately represents the entire sect of Balinese people. Additionally, in regards to Geertz' assertation that the Balinese learns his societal values through watching the cockfight, Crapazano rightly points out that "Who told Geertz? How can a whole people share a single subjectivity?"

We can reflect on Talal Asad's (1932-present) argument in his essay *The Concept of Cultural Translation in British Social Anthropology* (1986) to further this argument of the author's imposition: that since the anthropologist is transcribing the alien language into the (typically) English language, there is an inequality of language: the author or anthropologist "has the final authority in determining the subject's meanings - it is then the [anthropologist] who becomes the real author of the [subject]" (1986: pp. 162). When constructing a study into an alien culture, interpreting it from an alien gaze, there is a real possibility of ascribing meanings to the culture regardless of what those people wish. Arguably then, what ethnography is for Geertz - "reading over the shoulders of those to whom they [culture] properly belong" is unusable for actual study then?

But anthropology is a constantly evolving discipline. and Geertz's essay is only one example of how an ethnography ought to be carried out. It may be worth parsing then if we can apply the same criticisms to other ethnographies. For instance, we can look at Audrey Richards (1899-1984) on her book *Chisungu: A girls' initiation ceremony among the Bemba of Northern Rhodesia* (1956). Although written a while before Geertz's essay, it still incorporates some elements of his ethnographic style. Namely, the deep and incredibly thoughtful integration of oneself into that Bemba culture. What encompasses the book is a constant integration of the voice of the natives and what they believe about their own culture: for instance, during *The Ceremony* when the girls undergoing a rite of passage, crawling on all fours, we learn from the natives that they are doing this ritual because "[it makes] the girls look stupid, just to make us laugh" and later, in response to a "ritual representation of the hierarchy of rank among the women present", that "[they] are honouring the great ones" (1956: pp. 64). The narrative format of Audrey encountering the tribe, of meeting the "mistress of the ceremonies (nacimbusa)" is incredibly detailed, exploring their relationship as being "well known to me" and describing her feelings as "anxious", her intelligence has having a "sharp tongue." (ibid, pp. 61). We understand then that even before Geertz' essay, anthropologists like Audrey wrote about and developed her ethnographic research - incorporating the voice of the native that those like Crapazano and Asad worried was being imposed upon by Geertz's style of ethnographic research.

We can also see this style of ethnographic method - that is, of including the voices of the subject and trying to scope their culture out- develop with later ethnographic studies. For example, Anne Allison's study of the Tokyo Hostess Club incorporates many of these ethnographic elements. Like Geertz's essay, her book begins in a narrative format, telling a story of four white collar workers entering the hostess club, then describing how the hostess club functions and the role of the hostess. Given that she is writing for the field that has very little study on Japanese culture ("I was struck by the scant attention given three subjects in the [anthropological] literature - sexuality, women, cities" (1994: pp: 11)), the closeness and detail of the events described illustrate to the reader how closely involved Allison was in the hostess scene. In contrast to the prior two ethnographic studies however, Allison delves attention into the power dynamics of the relationship between the hostess and the men, and of the men and their boss - finding a Marxist angle on the hostess club and viewing it as not pleasure, but a system of which bosses can pay for "their workers to be and become men with a particular construct and utility ... " viewing it as having a critical function for Capitalism (ibid: pp. 203). She stresses how in contrast to European cultures, to explain what would be an alien culture for other cultural audiences, the system is not as deeply misogynistic as perceived: "mothers who stay at home with children and men who stay at work in clubs, away from home, are rewarded in these patterns by major Japanese institutions." (ibid: pp. 204). Her study, like Richards, incorporates the voice of the subject: here, we are driven to several recurring characters directly quoted - from men like Hamano, Yamamoto and Agata who attend the nightclub as a work function to hostesses like Bijo, Eri and Machiko. Their speech is quoted, their behaviours analysed for patterns and symbols. As Geertz suggested, by doing this style of interpretive ethnography, we can begin to understand the values of (to Western perspectives) strange activities like those of the Hostess club. Arguably then, through allowing the subject to impose on the anthropologist's work, we can begin to remove traces of authorial imposition. 

But can both works really be free of the author's distortion of their message? Aubrey Richards is reflexive in noting that "there are many blanks in my material ... I had little time to get subsequent comment from ... the men of the village ... the Christians living in the neighbourhood ... the girls themselves." (1956: pp. 61-62). Unlike Geertz and as we'll see, Allison, she recognises that the interpretation is not definitive - "The nature of ritual ... demands that there should be multiple explanations for most of the symbolic behaviour that composes it." (1956: pp. 113). There's an implication here that for a full scope of Bemba culture to be mapped out, more study has to be done. For Allison on the other hand, there is a distinct lack of reflexivity in regards to how her own western origins might've affected the validity and quality of her ethnography - she mentions that customers, over time, once realizing her dedication to this study, began to give her more information. Yet, we take for her word how much they were willing to show her of this kind of life. Additionally, some of her analysis leaves much to be desired: although I am not passing a judgement on whether this is true, the argument that the "value and devaluing of mizu shobai ... [is that] she is not a "real" mother ... the mizu shobai woman is constructed as a female who transgresses her very nature. For this she is degraded; for this, however, she is also enjoyed." (ibid, pp. 173-4). What about other cultures with a strong sense of familial bond? Japan cannot be the only place with a strong familial or rather mother-to-son bond yet what explains their popularity solely in Japan? It can't be that only Japanese men that desire women who transgress their maternal background. Could it be argued then that Allison is imposing her western values on sexuality on the culture of the hostess club?

But arguably it's not possible to remove all authorial bias from the work. If researcher imposition is unavoidable, and even with the voice of the native, the interpretation is still vastly flawed, then what is the value of anthropology as a comparative science? All works thereof are doomed to be biased, and what is really necessary is a reflexive argument. Therefore, none of what preceded makes ethnography less of a tool in exploring minority cultures: the development of this ethnographic style, and the use of reflexivity in seeing how cracked that interpretation may be is vital.

In conclusion, ethnography is a method of research that involves exploring a culture, integrating yourself into the culture and understanding its context. Although there are significant issues with this, such as the issue of the imposition of the author as seen in those such as Geertz, hotly argued by Crapazano and more, it cannot be understated how valuable interpretive ethnography is in illuminating cultures that don't get academic attention - from the Hostess club and themes of Japan, sexuality and gender in anthropology, or a distinctly female lens on tribal cultures such as Aubrey, ethnography helps to unearth these misconceptions and illuminate us the wider, more secret world. 
