
Metaphors and Challenges

Hello everybody! It's what - week six of Lent term now? As I'm sure many readers of this blog would know, as the term goes on the work just keeps on piling. When things get stressful, it's okay to take a break. So why not sit down for a couple minute read for this week's *The Pem?*

Today, we have a very excellent selection of poems from our members. One of them brought a poem for last weeks challenge week. This poet, a second year student, had a challenge to write a poem in a sonnet form - this writer is one that *adores* incredibly lyrical, long, emotive poems, so it was incredibly interesting to see how he would tackle this challenge!

*Sonnet Above the Canyon*
	Aerial daredevil, young and fearless,
	What is it you fear less: failure or heights?
	Are you fearful up there where sheer success
	Is graded on a curved cable, thin and tight?
	Suspended between decomposed plateaus,
	You’re an amateur acrobat on line:
	Chasing first time highs like bygone shadows
	Eclipsed by the blinding prospect of time.
	You’re almost halfway to forever,
	Lingering in limbo over the past
	On the taut path of books and professors
	Where capital is culture, built to last.
	You tread tight ropes like sun kissed horizons
	With golden futures to keep your eyes on.

A gorgeous piece as always. The poet here suggested that this poem was a reflection of his own time at Cambridge. As a second year student midway through Lent term in a three year course, it's incredibly daunting to realise that you're halfway through your degree. All that consternation, stress and studying - gone. 

He tackles this concept sublimely in his poem. It follows a journey, an introspection from the artist of his time at Cambridge - He starts as an "aerial daredevil", "an amateur acrobat", phrases that connotate a sense of youth, fearlessness and uncertainty. The metaphor of a 'tight-rope walker' is one that provokes this feeling of tenuousness, at any moment, this 'daredevil' could fall into the abyss. The internal rhyme and repetition - "fearless", "fear less", "failure", "fearful" embodies this slippery, weightless tension that we can identify within us, the possibility that we may not make it.

Then, the volta switches the feeling - now after having experienced one and a half year degree, he is more confident than ever to take on the future. The future seems uncertain but beautiful - "blinding prospects", a sense of "forever", "sun kissed horizons", "golden future". The end is in sight, his future is within reach and able to be grasped. 

This introspective piece helps showcase this feeling that resonates with many of us at various points in our lives. We all will undergo this feeling of being on a tight-rope, watching, steadying ourselves, trying not to stumble. Only when looking towards the future, and realising that, in the words of one of my favourite poets Robert Frost, "the best way out is always through" can we begin to make progress and enjoy our time here.

Now, we turn to a poem written by the usual author of this blog. This poem revolves around a daughter and her relationship with her mother. If implied nasty family dynamics are not your style, then I advise skipping to the next section of the blog.

Living with Mum:
	When they ran out eggshells,
	She learnt to walk on pins;
	Scavenge them from the arm of the sofa
	After mum had fallen asleep and left them there–
	Not on purpose, although
	The happy coincidence was
	They’d never sit on the arm of the sofa–
	If she could count the holes in her feet
	On two hands
	By the end of the day,
	Then she had to search under the bed
	For her tongue, as it lolled
	About, as it searched
	For the needle in the pin cushion,
	Ready to be sewn back on;
	Mumbling and blaspheming at the same time.

As always, an incredible poem from Maddy. It begins with an adaption of the classic idiom, meaning to behave in a cautious manner around someone and inverts the saying into pins. There's an unsettling feeling to the poem: whilst the poem concerns the relationship between the daughter and her mother, the mother does not appear much at all in the poem at all. What kind of effect does this create? Maddy suggested that the absence of the mother was to make us concentrate on the consequences of her actions, and to generalise her actions. For me, it makes her presence ethereal. We don't know *what* the mother did, and makes her feel less of a person than a *thing*. 

The daughter has to struggle with walking on 'pins', an image sure to draw up horror in the minds of anyone whose ever stepped on a LEGO before. There's an interesting transition here - from the domestic setting to the sofa, to the private: 'arm of the sofa', 'under the bed', as though the daughter is being pushed to the corner of her own room. Although the emotions of the character is not explicitly stated, Maddy emphasised heavily the physicality of the people in describing their feelings - "walk", "two hands", "tongue", "holes in her feet":

As Maddy stated:
	"I think that the physicality is a big part of all of the metaphors and making the emotions "real" in the sense of being physical feelings that the reader can tangibly imagine, also visually, especially with the tongue image that takes apart another idiom, i.e. holding your tongue, as well as being a reference to the personified tongue of women in Shakespeare and the classics."

It's a highly visceral image, to find one's tongue lolling about, searching for a needle, ready to be sewn on. The ending line of 'mumbling' and 'blaspheming' depicts a story not yet resolved: the passive aggressive mumble, the religious connotations, as though the relationship between the two hasn't been resolved just yet. The underlying tension here still persists and we have an image here of a religious figure with the term 'blaspheming', someone more of a concept than a person, and yet undermined in the same line - 'mumbling.' Perhaps we can attest to someone in our lives falling out of grace in this way.

Maddy's poem here is a beautiful look into a difficult relationship. Not to toot her horn for giving me the opportunity to write for this blog, but it is truly an amazing poem. The sense of unease, tension, and more is great to behold.

Finally, my poem.

Garden Therapy:
	*It wasn’t always like this*, you claim
	Knifing the Earth with your steel trowel.
	*There was a lot of agony, sadness*
	*And a whole bunch of pain.* You slash

.
	At the soil in crosses and an X marks the spot.
	You gingerly lower stones into the dirty grave.
	The gravel absorbs the rain, too much and it’ll wilt.
	These plants are to water like a moth to a tapestry of light
.
	A special way of uncertainty that no one should have to bear:
	For too little, and too much, and the green floods into brown,
	Into black, creeping gangrene, a spreading infection
	Up the arm and into the brain

.
	This is what we fear, not death or violence
	But the tiny cuckoo-bird, buried in our bodies
	That rots what we touch and turns to bile
	The words that come out of our mouth

.
	The hand that fed us, and the poison
	In our veins that bubble like boiling water.
	Had enough, we turn to the chisel
	And carving out the torments sunken

.
	In the dirt of our flesh.
	We rip out that sunless white growth,
	And take to our poisoned veins and snap the tendons
	Like taut piano strings

.
	You slam the trowel into the grave
	And clump the dirt out with your naked hands,
	We saw a worm cleaved in two
	And watch its blood sink into the Earth.

.
	*Poor little thing*, you said, *trembling*,
	Cupping the worm in your palms
	Its broken body framed by
	Your rough and calloused hands

.
	*Born in the wrong place, the wrong time and met the wrong people.*
	I sat there watching the crumpled creature’s
	Splintered frame rest on your bare knees.
	If it were up to me, I would’ve tossed it away already.

.
	It took a moment before I realised that you were crying. I looked in awe
	Your head tucked into your palms.
	Your atoning body framed by the sun’s holy light.
	Your sacred heart bursting with emotion.

.
	Our own trauma, our own grief, our own growth
	And I dared not comfort you if I tried.

I won't dwell too long on this poem. I wrote this poem as a reflection of the ways in which we cope with traumatic events. It follows two people who've presumably gone through awful things in their life and their two ways of dealing with it - the protagonist who, in violent images, ripped out what hurt him and the friend who is deeply in touch with their emotions.

I know those who turn to being stoic, masculine - there's a saying here about how generational trauma can write itself in your bloodline. I know those who pushed on and created an iron shell around themselves, and I know those who didn't. I suppose, in this sense, this writing was meant to be a reflection of this stoic masculinity: of forcing yourself not to feel, or forcing yourself not to cry.

This sentimentality is something one should embrace themselves with. This stoic armour leaves one wanting, seen at the end of this poem, when the poet realises that since he is unattuned with his emotions, he can't comfort his friend. The religious imagery here I put at the end, of one's sacred heart and holy light, embodies this disconnect from the speaker and the friend: unable to reconcile, unable to empathize, at once they are made into this holy figure that the speaker cannot ever realise.

Overall, we had four poems that all dealt with the use of metaphor in expressing struggle - from the tightrope walker, to this metaphorical story of the garden and Maddy's story of daughter, her mother and her tongue. The poem that was not covered today, another member's poem about a garden as well, dealt with this metaphor of a garden being disrupted and disturbed. Rest assured, all submissions handed in were just as amazing as each other, even though I was not able to write about it. The use of metaphor in these poems all evoked such sentimental images ranging from uncertainty to comfort. As always, all of the members of our society outdo themselves!

That's all for this time folks. I hope you enjoyed this small respite from your learning to read about the poetry submitted this week. Come back next week for another blog post! 

As ever, happy writing,

Lots of love, 'The Pem'

(written by Deneil Payumo).

(All poems quoted are quoted with the author's permission. If you want us to cover one of your poems, let us know!)