Why for Hayek was state planning the road to serfdom? 

The debate as to how much, if at all, the government should intervene in the economy is one that still lingers today. For Fredrich Hayek, an economist born in Vienna who lived to see through the first two world wars, and the rise and fall of the Soviet Union, the answer is fairly binary: if possible, the government should not intervene at all. In this essay, I will trace through his ideas – first, I will discuss why he believes, as the question suggests, state planning will lead to serfdom by exploring his ideas towards the power of the free market and the risks of trying to interfere with that. Then, I will explore various issues of his conception with the free market: the risk of monopolistic practices that he vastly overlooks, the risks of applying his ideas to contemporary issues such as climate change and finally his overlooking of the ways Capitalism can perpetuate inequalities such as that of race. I will conclude by suggesting that his ideas aren’t applicable to society and have not stood the test of time. 

It is important to note before we begin what exactly Hayek means with terms such as ‘serfdom’. In this context, Hayek believes that state planning (that is the acting of government in economies) is a fool’s errand; ideas and principles of social justice that dictate these interventionist policies are likely to lead us into a totalitarian society. 

At the core of Hayek’s argument is a resound belief in the free market, a market without government interference. To borrow a phrase from Adam Smith, Hayek believes in the power of ‘the invisible hand’: the idea that the self-interested acts of the individual can help create an economic system that distributes resources as efficiently as possible. For Hayek, the main power of the free market is its information-gathering abilities, overcoming the “imperfect” and incomplete nature of human knowledge in societies: as Andrew Gamble writes, Hayek believes that the market can “bring all this decentralized knowledge [around prices, production opportunities etc.] together by co-ordinating the activities of different agents, none of whom knows in detail every aspect of the whole of which they are part.” (Gamble, 1996 pp. 67). In essence, if the knowledge around production is fragmented across a large society, then a decentralized system is necessary to ensure economic activity. It is impossible for any government or even computer simulation to possess the knowledge of the market – it is “systemic and holistic” (Gray, 1998, pp. 37). With this in mind, “it is this systemic knowledge that is … wasted when attempts are made to correct or plan market processes.” (ibid). Central planning therefore is doomed to fail. There is no possible way in Hayek’s view for the government to possess the information-gathering capabilities of the market and allocate resources efficiently. This boundless knowledge cannot be collected nor interpreted. 

This leads to serfdom in several ways. Before addressing that however, it’s important to distinguish Hayek’s belief in liberty. Hayek is a key advocate for negative liberty – liberty defined by a lack of constraints on one’s actions. For him, the “attribution of justice … to social outcomes comes an inversion of its proper use”, as advocates of positive liberty, those who believe that liberty is defined by the ability to achieve goals, would suggest (ibid, pp. 70). Aiming to equalize the outcomes of people would therefore be treating men unequally and trample on the rights of others as it is impossible for any government agency to understand the market enough to distribute resources efficiently. In essence, many claims to social equality for Hayek comes as nonsensical and impossible to realistically fulfill. 

That is why for Hayek any attempt at coordinating society is impossible to achieve and will always lead to totalitarianism, even if the intentions in changing the market are just. To accomplish the goals of social justice, there is “no resting-place for socialists short of complete central direction of the economy and society” (Gamble, 1996 pp. 67), that the more government agents attempt to influence the market, the more it will malfunction, leading to even more controls. As Hayek states, “Once government has embarked on planning for the sake of justice, it cannot refuse responsibility for anybody's fate or position” (1944, pp. 138). Once the government begins to try and solve contemporary issues such as vast wealth inequality, it will stop at nothing to expand its coercive powers to force the market to behave in such a way to benefit everybody. Additionally, a “centrally planned economy ... can never be run on an international basis [as] the size of the transfers makes it too politically difficult to implement” (Gamble, 1996 pp. 87); the redistribution of resources, and the idea of how much or what an economy should receive is nigh impossible to organize on a global level. That is why for Hayek only one principle of justice must be adhered to: that of negative liberty. Anything else will lead to totalitarianism, as those seeking a ‘just’ distribution of resources will demand more drastic changes in the economic system and as we try to ensure social justice, we inevitably end up undermining the institutions and the mechanisms of the free market that helps ensure our prosperity. For this reason, because of a lack of single unity as to what manner of social justice we should enact and a lack of knowledge as to how to implement that, any form of state planning will inevitably lead to despotism. 

However, Hayek’s analysis leaves a lot to be desired. Namely, his insistence on this binary between a free market, that leads to a just distribution of resources, and state planning, that leads to tyranny. Is it not true that a combination of both state intervention and free market economics is needed to maximize economic efficiency? No country in the world, from the Soviet Union to the US, relies solely on central planning or free market economics. For Hayek’s entire argument to work, there must be a binary between these two styles of managing an economy so he could argue that Socialists, when given an opportunity to intervene in the economy, takes the slippery slope to its full conclusion. Indeed, if we take his argument as it is, then any economy in the world will tend towards totalitarianism. But, as we know, Margaret Thatcher (1925-2013) became prime minister of the UK several decades after the publication of Hayek’s book and Ronald Reagan (1911-2004) too became president of the US soon after Thatcher’s election. Their neo-liberalist ideas around reducing government intervention in the market suggests that Hayek’s argument is not so accurate: both the UK and the US did not fall down the slippery slope but turned the other wheel. In doing so, this suggests that increasing state intervention in the market does not necessarily lead to increasing serfdom. 

Additionally, there are several flaws to this conception of the free market as the best way to allocate resources. The free market tends towards monopolisation, where a single firm dominates the market leading to a less efficient distribution of resources. Although an analysis into the downsides of monopoly power is the scope of another essay, it is worth considering how Hayek barely contends with this issue. Hayek however does mention that “there is a difference between creating a system in which competition will work beneficially as possible, and one that accepts institutions as they are” and that one of the main goals of government would be to shape institutions that help promote the market to work freely (pp. 138). That said, Hayek argues that monopoly power, if not constrained by competition, is not as dangerous as trade unions. This is a fundamental bias in Hayek’s account: large-scale organizations can prove as much, if not greater, threat to liberty than trade unions can. Large scale organizations can absolutely coerce workers, seen in how Nike, Adidas and countless other clothing companies have fallen into controversy for their use of sweatshops – working conditions often described as inhumane and poor. What then would be the worth of worker’s liberty if their suffering allows capitalism to thrive? 

Additionally, Hayek’s belief understandably does not consider the role of digital capitalism. Some scholars such as Shoshana Zuboff (2019) would argue that digital capitalism can undermine civic tradition. The emergence of surveillance capitalism that seeks to extract and sell online user data to corporations that seek to influence user behaviour could go a long way to distorting the benefits of the free market. In comparison to the free market, the data capitalism now provides can be understood. Corporations can harvest data about user opinions, lifestyles, personal information and parse that through countless analysts to target advertising more effectively. Arguably then, capitalism in its current form, long past Hayek’s publication of his book, could undermine civil liberty, and coerce individuals without them even being aware of it. The state in this view must act against surveillance capitalism to protect consumers from the actions of large corporations. 

Hayek’s view of free-market capitalism might also inadvertently ignore severe inequalities of race or gender. For Hayek, inequality is mostly justified if it came about by the free actions of individuals. But this philosophy ignores that individuals can be influenced by factors beyond their control: social setting, discrimination and so on. Andy Powell and Brigid Francis Devine (2023) find that in October-December 2022, the unemployment rate for people of white ethnic background was 3.1% whereas for those from Pakistani ethnic background, it was 8.7% and for people from multiple ethnic background it was 11.3%. Although it should be stated that the research came after COVID-19 pandemic, it is worth considering whether this unemployment is just a matter of personal choice from people of ethnic backgrounds, or if it should be understood through a racial background of inequality. This however is the topic of another essay. 

Finally, we can also consider how the state may need to intervene to fix issues of contemporary society. Consider the issue of climate change for example: how certain can we be that the free market will help provide the technology to save society from the effects of climate change? Countless research has been done to scope out the dangers of leaving climate change unchecked – as the World Health Organisation (2023) finds, “recent research attributes 37% of heat-related deaths to human-induced climate change … projects 250 000 additional yearly deaths by the 2030s due to climate change impact on diseases like malaria and coastal flooding” amongst a litany of other related health issues. Arguably, it is impossible to know for certain whether competition in a free market may provide the technology in time to spare us from the worst effects of climate change. If that is true, then it may be vital for the state to intervene in targeting technology to become more efficient and promote net-zero goals.  

In conclusion, Hayek’s argument fails to live up to the scrutiny of contemporary society and is deeply optimistic in the power of the free market. It is too dismissive of the dangers of free market capitalism, that being of monopoly power, and does not adequately consider who suffers in the production of commodities and how institutionally, minority ethnic groups may fail to succeed in a seemingly ‘just’ (in terms of negative liberty) society. As we saw, he takes free market capitalism as it is without considering the political backdrop of capitalism: how a background of discrimination might influence the ways in which economic actors in capitalism may prove to disenfranchise others. When applied to contemporary society, his insistence for the state to abstain from the economy is unable to be reconciled with the potential dangers of surveillance capitalism and its new forms of coercion, or the dangers of believing the free market has a proposal to counteract global issues. In all, it’s hard to argue that increasing state power will lead to serfdom, and it is strikingly more difficult to argue that the state should not be involved in the economy today.  

Bibliography: 

A. Crag (2023) Climate Change [https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health) [Accessed 6th October 2023] 

Devine F. B. and Powell. A (2023) Unemployment by ethnic background. [https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/sn06385/](https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/sn06385/) [Accessed 6th October 2023]. 

Gamble, A 1996, Hayek : The Iron Cage of Liberty, Polity Press, Newark. Available from: ProQuest Ebook Central. [5 November 2023]. 

Gray, J 1998, Hayek on Liberty, Taylor & Francis Group, London. Available from: ProQuest Ebook Central. [5 November 2023]. 

Hayek, F.A. (2008). The Road to Serfdom: Text and Documents: The Definitive Edition (B. Caldwell, Ed.) (1st ed.). Routledge. [https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315728124](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315728124)  

Runciman, D. (2021) Confronting Leviathan, London: Profile Books 

Zuboff, S. (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. New York: Public Affairs.