Should IR theories be able to explain international politics at all time and all places?

I heavily disagree with the notion that international relations (IR) theories should be able to explain politics at all time and all places. IR theories rest on (as Weber would define) an ideal type - a mental construct that deliberately simplifies, exaggerates and in doing so, approximates reality to be studied. As a result, although IR theories can explain parts of society at some levels, it will inherently be unable to provide the full picture of international politics. To discuss this, I will run my essay through three theories of IR: realism, liberal-institutionalism and constructivism. I will examine how an understanding of these three core theories can help explain and raise questions as to how international politics proceeds, or will proceed, bringing an understanding of these theories to new contemporary issues. After that, I will explain how these IR theories are simple mental constructs - explaining limitations to their theories and how they evidently can not be applied to all of history and all of geopolitics which limits their usefulness. I will suggest however that this overlooks the usefulness of such a theory, and conclude by suggesting that IR theories are unable to explain international politics at all times, but this deliberate simplification provides a model that still retains the use of these theories in spite of this simplification.

Firstly, let's examine realist theories and understand what it brings to the study of international politics. Realist theories focus extensively on the state and their capacity of military power and of violence. They suggest that all states are involved in a state of anarchy: since states are of their sovereign, and typically have no powers above them, they all exist in a state of nature where each one of them, for any reasons whatsoever, can attack another. As Kenneth Waltz (1979) argues, "because some states may at any time use force, all states must be prepared to do so ... war may at any time break out." (1979, pg. 102) For the realists, there is nothing that can be done to eradicate this state of nature: states cannot absolutely know for certain if one state wants to attack another, but has to be nonetheless wary of the potential damage war can bring out and they cannot be certain that other states will be willing to support them should war break out. Essentially, the world exists in a state of nature and all states must engage in a "self-help system" - this means that states must rely only on themselves. Should a foreign state build up military power, states must therefore try to seek their own preservation and build up military power to counteract this. This is the premise of the "balance of power" that lies in realist theory: as Waltz claims, there are two ways states can accomplish this, either through "internal efforts (moves to increase economic capacity ... military strength) and external efforts (strengthening and enlarge one's own alliance or to weaken and shrink an opposing one)." (ibid, p. 118). This brings an understanding of international politics to IR that is incredibly unique: it dismisses the optimism of liberal theories that democracies or modern states do not fight each other. It provides an explanation for why, as Mearsheimer (2014) would argue, states are still wary of one another even in a time of peace, that the U.S. has about one hundred thousand troops in Europe and Northeast Asia as that states nonetheless are rooted in this 'security dilemma' and prepared to go to war at any time. It also gives a solid theory on how international relations will play out throughout history and can explain contemporary conflicts, such as that of Ukraine. As Mearsheimer illustrates, applying a realist perspective on the 2014 Ukraine war can illuminate how a section of the blame for Putin's actions can be laid on America for disrupting and ignoring the balance-of-power, threatening Russia indirectly by permitting Ukraine to join the EU and NATO. By understanding international conflict through this lens through this pessimistic realist theory, we can understand why certain conflicts come about, and how it can be avoided. Certainly, although this is the scope for another essay, an understanding of balance-of-power politics can illuminate how even rising powers like China can disrupt this balance and cause conflict, bringing an interesting understanding of political conflict to IR theory.

Whereas Realism contents itself with the assumption that states will always live in anarchy and eventually war, Liberal-Institutionalism takes these same assumptions and starting point and reaches a different conclusion with him. Keohane (2005) would argue that states can be rational and fearful but if states share the same interest and are willing to cooperate with others "they may be able to adjust principles, norms, rules, and procedures - institutions referred to in this book as regimes." (2005, pg: 83-84). In the absence of a hegemonic power that realists would argue causes discord and anarchy in international politics, international regimes can heavily favour countries to cooperate with shared principles: Keohane points at both the International monetary Fund (IMF) and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and explains that these agreements exclude countries who are not members of the organisation or fail to abide with it. Essentially, if given enough time, states might come to see the value of cooperating with one another, especially if an international regime promises benefits to these said states. States, as realists would argue, could live in a state of paranoia, arming themselves in the event war breaks out but this fails to consider is the importance of international institutions and the reputation of said states on whether states perform certain actions: meaning that they may be pressured into negotiation. If living under an international regime, arguably there may be a possibility for peace. For a great example of this theory in action, we can consider the Montreal Protocol of 1987 - a treaty designed to protect the ozone layer. In a realist world, states are self-interested and would not collaborate to protect the ozone layer: there is simply no guarantee that states will keep to their word in treaties, and it is simply more advantageous for them to hope that other states pay the price of phasing out substances that deplete the ozone layer rather than paying the price themselves. However, an international regime formed - the Multilateral Fund - and this aimed to assist developing countries with a fund to aid in the Montreal protocol. There was an incentive then to cooperate and peacefully stop climate change. Therefore, this event shows a clear example of how states, given enough time, may prove to cooperate. Liberal-institutionalist theories helps explain how international politics may end up ensuring states cooperate over time.

Both theories despite that rest on the same assumption: that states are rational self-interested actors who are essentially homogenous - afraid that they'll be exploited. Constructivists theorists on the other hand take a different approach: states are hugely different, and have a variety of social context that determines their interest. Anarchy can be a property of global international politics but realist and liberal-institutionalist theorists take anarchy to have one form. As Ted Hopf argues, imagine a scenario where there is a fire in a theatre. Who runs for the exit first: the disabled, the strongest, the young, the old or are they all in a mad dash to the exit? As he puts it, "determining the outcome will require knowing more about ... the culture, norms, institutions, procedures, rules, and social practices that constitute the actors and the structure alike." (1998, pg: 173). Anarchy can have multiple meanings based on the state own intersubjective understanding and it is impossible to generalise. Constructivists would argue that what we need to understand is those same intersubjective meanings: how state context informs their identities and in doing so, informs their interest. For instance, as Hopf illustrates, why did the United States perceive the Communist threat from the Soviet Union threat as immense but "Europeans ... [regarded] third world states as economic actors or as former colonies."? (ibid, 187). Hopf suggests this is because of the United States forming an identity around being the anti-communist protector of their values domestic and abroad. We can even apply that to Russia's second invasion of Ukraine in 2022: whilst this is beyond my purview, there could potentially be an argument that, as Gamez (2023) argues, that the war in Ukraine was formed due to a "mismatch between Russia's self-perception and its recognition by liberal states", the fact that its "political elite cannot survive by adhering to Western norms" and finally the idea that it is perceived as the "threatening other ... because of the Russian imperialism past among certain EU members." - it is essentially a way for Russia to assert their self-perception. Essentially, this presents a new understanding of how war in Ukraine was inevitable as the current world order vehemently rejects Russia's values. This analysis could theoretically be carried out on rising powers such as China: the way that they have integrated their culture into Western countries. Such a constructivist approach allows us to understand why states may reach cooperation in certain circumstances and why even though it is in their best interest states may fail to cooperate even though it is in their best interest.

However theories are a simplifying lens to understand a complex world. Given the complex state of politics, theories are created upon assumptions that help simplify international politics. Theories therefore are meant to be used in conjunction to answer questions about geopolitics, not as a basis for understanding politics at all times and all places. For instance, both Liberal-Institutionalism and Realist theories rest on the assumption that states are rational self-interested actors and minimalize the impact of ideology on foreign policies. What if what is considered rational for one actor isn't considered rational for another? Under realist theories, there might be an assumption that all states should be worried about each other states capacity for violence, but if so then why is the U.S more concerned about some states possessing nuclear weapons than others? The U.K has nuclear weapons and is closer to the U.S than Russia, but as it stands the U.S is concerned about Russia over the U.K. In exploring why some state may be more concerned about other states than others, we could apply a constructivist approach. On the other hand, there could be an argument that there is a certain fragility and individualism to state behaviour: that one can, even if relations between states are positive, never trust the promises of another state as what Realists propose. Take again the 2014 Ukrainian war. In 1994, Ukraine signed the Budapest Memorandum between the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States. In exchange for giving up their nuclear weapons, the Russian Federation, UK and U.S. must never threaten or use military force against Ukraine. When Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the U.S did not protect Ukraine from their invasion, essentially making said theory null. This event certainly showcases one pessimistic truth (for realists) behind international relations: as Ukraine could not depend on the U.S. and the U.K to protect themselves against Russia, so too can any state trust another to come to its aid. All of these theories have their uses and can help understand the world, but they aren't completely predictive and descriptive of international politics throughout time and place. 

In conclusion, international relations theory cannot explain international politics in all places and areas, but that doesn't undermine their usefulness as an analytical tool to examine the world through, understanding international politics through an analytical mindset. This doesn't limit their usefulness however as these theories can help answer questions that other theories are unable to answer. For example, what about the question of gender in international politics? How does gender enforce a state's interests and agenda? Theories of anarchy and rationalism would be limited in understanding how ideologies of gender, race or class can influence what policies a state might focus on. But, in areas where interaction changes identity incredibly slowly, constructivism might falter: for example, issues of power, military, economics is still quite important might help inform state activity as opposed to issues of interactions. Take the security dilemma of nuclear weapons - are states really so accepting of social norms and trust that nuclear weapons won't be used against them, that they would be so carefree with their survival? In reality, international relations theories are incredibly helpful to tackle questions and problems that the other theories cannot solve, and this in turns add to their usefulness. Therefore, I'd argue that the limitations of IR theory proposed by this question - that it cannot explain international relations in all time and space - is actually its greatest boon.


Kenneth Waltz - Theory of IR
Miersharmer (article on Ukraine)
Keohane after hegemony
https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/rebuilding-ozone-layer-how-world-came-together-ultimate-repair-job
http://www.multilateralfund.org/default.aspx
https://thegeopolitics.com/why-russia-invaded-ukraine-a-multitheoretical-approach/