Whether or not the core characteristics of the welfare state are laid out straight away: city councils are going bankrupt, social services are privatized, where is this welfare state - how many years of Tory political governing models. Use of Austerity as a framing device.

What are the characteristics of the traditional welfare state, how do we define that and how can we answer the question of how it persists even with that - a legacy of public intervention and the social welfare state hanging on but they are becoming more and more constrained, and that shifts the angle of the argument. Is it persisting and if so, can we call it that?

Good job of coverage, and broadly trying to analyse it and explain why it may have a staying power. We need to trouble the question a bit: saying a different argument that means moving up from the definition is to assess whether it still exists.

Radical right that did come from the political economies I talked about (Hayek) or a group of Austrian theorists, an Austrian school that were right-wing economists that tried to generate ideas of the privatized state as a much more efficient notion of generating economic wealth. So, we've got that one on the one hand and we've got the legacy the post-war state, the welfare state in place as a consequence of the recognition of the second-world war.

We should look at that front end and think about that argument, looking at it front centre. Then we can take it step by step in terms of how to justify it. From my point of view, (hers) it would be useful to say something like "the concept of the welfare state has a long history, dating back from X and Y. It has become an incredibly contested and polarizing subject, and it demands a definition of it." Then, we must lay out a definition and then when we look at a characteristics of what we see in contemporary Britain in terms of a public notion of the state, what are these public goods, are they diminishing?

A book by Wendy Brown - The Death of the Demoss. She says that we are seeing is illiberalism creeping in instead of a robust positively democratic welfare state, and we have witnessed that for over five decades. The real question - is there a staying power, or is there something else. Well, what would we call it if we say that the welfare state is constantly under tax.

A bit stronger - a really good point in that the idea of a system as under attack and has been under for some time, and what that means, as those attacks tell us what is left over.

Also, thinking about what's left over, and how we think about its potential staying power or the potential for its political legitimacy when its so substantively under attack by the global right. I'm right to declare some limitations but I should change some things: not only has the form of the welfare state changed and we need to ask some questions on what that looks like, and what elements remain, we need to talk about their staying power specifically. In that, we move our definition up front and we question that things from a different angle: many people talk about the death of the welfare state, or that we're part of a quasi-welfare state. When we look at the sub-council or otherwise, we can see how it was taken over. First time in history to declare bankruptcy in councils, because basically to run the services they need to get the transfer payments from the government but if it is insufficient it will run into difficulty, and they will mismanage money. There has been inequalities in councils but these are good examples of the actual diminishment of the idea in a welfare state as we cannot redistribute income when we come in. What does it mean to talk about the welfare state knowing these characteristics, and can we even call it that?

What might be important in the paragraph talking about neoliberalism, defining it but showing it or showing how this form of economic intervention into state life and into its economies shifts the very terms of the meaning of welfare and the social good. So, we're beginning to start to see how free market economics seems to redefine how we understand the public - including "the shifting nature of" or "the growing influence of" a link between capitalism and democracy. This is another point of powerful argumentation - the death of the demos. Brown talks a lot about universities and how public institutions have been eroded by the conflation by the democratic ethos (?) and capital ethos and how this fusion has undermined what we called the public welfare state.

We have a lot of room to talk about the definition, and its important to argue that the neoliberal side is a broad state of thing, we can talk about highly advanced neoliberalism or state life, or the financialized state, or how public good is clientised

We could look at the works of Susan Robertson and how modern institutions that we would've defined as public or social services are basically private services contracted out and citizens are now clients instead of citizens who should have access to service.

In that first intervention we can use this definition to showcase how the welfare state is changing and undermined. And, we can begin to talk about what that means in terms of social rights. I move on to say that 'this is what is undermining it and how' but we can get more of an evidence-based, and more languages of description-based instead of neoliberalism such as how other states that are resource rich reflect on the diminishment of the welfare state reflect on the diminishment - rentiore (ron-tiere) state and how the basic idea is that because they're oil rich or gas rich, Saudi or other places like that, how states receive income without having an increase in the productivity ... and that gives them an ability to tax citizens but basically these high income states are renting services to citizens. In a weird kind of way, that's not what's happening in the UK but if we're thinking about it in that way, when privatizing the welfare state, we have a lot to think and how to finance it - they become like mini businesses.

Say, moving back to Saudi states - the concept of the welfare state is what we're being asked to deal with but because we're making an argument that it is transforming, you've defined it, trying to question whether it still exists, if it should have another name and we could make another argument of showing how its undermined is bringing in the neoliberalism, examples there-of but also languages of the state circulating over time: the rontiere (?) state that not's providing services but renting them out to people. When we think about the UK, there are basically sort of clients where we get access to services and because its resource rich, not guaranteed them as a citizen. Might be rentier state. Rent services as a reward, we're allowed to rent essentially in a kind of monopoly basically. We're accumulating capital in the state on the basis of its resources and in that accumulation of capital, people are renting it, they're not guaranteed it. That's the big difference between a capital orientation to state hood or a social welfare state where you should be guaranteed it.

We could look at quasi-private market states or fully privatized states. We can even see Canada as the example of the former. Still strong support for that. Like the NHS and stuff like that. It may be more useful to read more widely to see examples of statehood or other models that are intervening in its transformation, like the trans-national pressures. Here, we begin to expand the meaning of what it means to talk about the 'privatization' of things, looking at transnational influences elsewhere: global conservative right, Hayek, Austrian schools, welfare state generates nothing. If we were to take a Marxist view, the argument remains: if there is any traction for the future in the welfare state, it remains in the frame of the stabilizing feature - we can only reduce inequality if we can only redistribute resources. People aren't born equally into the system and thus cannot compete on the same level and will never achieve parity with another citizen, and that inequality will breed political instability.


Once we've got refined we don't need "this is beyond the scope of this essay". If we can do this with more substantive signposting in the first paragraph, these are things to be thinking about in the neoliberal side of things, reframing the argument.

The next bit: perhaps another section which talks about how we might imagine conceptualization of the welfare state. What explains its staying power, explaining its original concept of the welfare state, saying something like "the necessity for a welfare state to be sustained in complex political economy needs to be understood in social rights and distribution." The staying power has something to do with bigger picture rights and the sustenance of distribution and the reality that it recognizes inequality as a first principle. So, basically privatization doesn't recognise inequality and that was what Phillip Bourgeois says is the 'right hand side' of the state but the 'left the hand of the state' recognises that we are born into an already inequal state and that is perhaps how we should talk about social welfare and democracy there.

We could look Nancy Friezer on 'Recognition versus redistribution' where we need both in a welfare state - a question looking largely at minoritized perspectives. So, what we're doing is essentially saying where in terms of the value it should persist, that still doesn't answer the question if it does but we should argue what we understand what the welfare state is, a question of rights and distribution, that it stills exist and still contributes to economic growth. This is an interesting argument and we're curious about where that comes from. 

The NHS may not provide income but it provides resources - the other example of COVID-19 pandemic which to be honest if we're thinking about the economic rewards from it, the covid pandemic became a resource for employment and generating huge amounts of private income - David Cameron and Hancock used the example of negotiating with Chinese companies to develop equipment and much of it arrived and was not vetted or usable. There was a lack of accountability.

Start my argument at social rights, moving from neoliberal intervention especially based on the definition provided and our second intervention is that we would argue that the value of sustaining the ideals of the welfare state contribute to political stability with the recognition that without this, recognition that people are born into unequal societies. The welfare state engages in a sort of levelling state. I don't think we should argue right away that it would generate wealth - we need to get the political and welfare side of it evidenced. We need to engage in practices of recognition and social rights - care for the elderly, and establish that a bit better, looking at examples and bringing back notions of the welfare state where they do exist and the other benefits (like Norway), the Nordic model, but in the UK the Nanny State, what kind of evidence do we have for it and what do we point to in terms of political stability. Think about wars in Norway, and how it is largely to do with mechanism of equalization and mechanisms of rights and such. There is an argument for its political stability and recognition of it as public spaces and mitigate against global crises. The question remains whether any of these states have succeeded in thinking about these private dimensions, or that some of these models look at the conjoint ideas about distribution, the recognition of inequality as a working baseline for society, or the ways in which we can cushion this (the blow of deep recessions). The idea of what the welfare state is doing, and we could then talk about its potential economic development, making sure that we're showcasing several sides of the welfare state.

We can look Pierre Bourdieu. What Bourdieu is talking about here... https://www.variant.org.uk/32texts/bourdieu32.html he uses this metaphor of the left hand of the state and right hand of the state, seeking to illuminate the devastating impacts of neoliberalism on democracy. How, even the socialists are committing to this and basically how the common good get undermined by these financial pressures and how do they undermine the public sceptre. He calls it instead of the welfare state, a competitive nationalism that supports the rejuvenation of a global market place and pushes towards more human suffering and undermines the left hand of the state. A lot of it comes from his work on human suffering, people working for disadvantaged communities and more.

Apprenticeships is a nice argument, T-Levels, and more... but our J. does not know enough about the economic side and whether the pandemic transformed labour market inequality. The furlough scheme could have been an exemplification of that. I need more examples to back up this argument. Pandemic one was worrying, as most of the interventions were fuelled by private contracts - a small number of people made a huge amount of money, and none of that money has been redistributed.
### Replace Bourgeois with Bourdieu. Look at the interview. 

When talking about Hayek, the best move may be to move into what the counter argument is. "Of course, opposition to this idea of redistribution has a long history." I might need to talk about government intervention with Keynesian models. So here's Hayek interventions but look at the state we're in in terms of inequality statistics and probably highly advanced Hayekian notion of austerity. We can get in there somehow.

We might be able to move the conclusion up a lot. We could put the neoliberal ideas in the conclusion. Let's leave that for a second and move to the conclusion. We could ask critical questions - what does that mean? I want to argue this, but I want to argue that the welfare state in its original form no longer exists and that we need re-definition in light of all of these pressures. We could talk about what work it could do and why it has sustained some potential. Her argument might be that it might not be the same, and what work we could use to transform it. Stop saying 'its messy' or 'its complex' but recognise that all of these interventions we've examined showcases that the actual figuration of the welfare state as understood has been transformed, something akin to that.

We could definitely tighten and shorten the neoliberal section, and look carefully at signposting and structure, rolling it out based on what we've evidenced. We could have a shortened section in that conclusion talking about neoliberalism "I've been using terminology of neoliberalism generally but it's important in understanding the critiques of the terminology".

J. is not an expert on surveillance capitalism.