Benedict Anderson's (1963-2015) book *Imagined Communities* (1983) is incredibly vital to understanding the rise of nationalism. To answer this question I will trace my essay through the basic premises of Anderson's theory. After that, I will regard its strengths: namely its ability in revolutionising the discourse of nationalism, helping to shape discussion and later theories on nationalism such as Michael Billig's (1947-present) *Banal Nationalism* (1995). After that, I will underscore several criticisms of Anderson's theory: namely that it is too narrow in examining the effects of globalisation on nationalism, how it is dismissive of other cultures and how they tackled nationalist ideas and finally how dismissive he is of religion as still being prevalent in modern life. To conclude, I argue that Anderson's theory of nationalism still paved the way for understanding both the nation and nationalism as a continuingly dynamic and energetic process.

Firstly, let's understand what Anderson outlined in his book, *Imagined Communities*. For him, he traces the rise of nationalism when "three fundamental cultural conceptions, all of great antiquity, lost their axiomatic grip on men's mind." For him, these ideas would be linked when the importance of religion dwindled in people's eyes: for instance, the decline in the belief of "script language [offering] privileged access to ontological truth ... the belief that society was naturally organized around ... monarchs ... third was a conception ... in which cosmology and history were indistinguishable ... combined, these ideas rooted human lives firmly in the very nature of things."(1983: pp. 36). In essence, akin to a Durkheimian conception of anomie, nationalism helped to counter the feelings of lostness in the U.K as people looked for a new way of "linking fraternity, power and time meaningfully together." For Anderson, nationalism coincidentally happened to be the vessel of which those ideas are linked together: aided primarily by the "interaction of capitalism and the development of printing technology, which resulted in the production of large quantities of books and newspapers which ... [formed] the foundation for the imagination of the political community" that led people to relate to each other. The key term here for Anderson is that the nation is an imagined community" - where it is impossible for its members to know each other but still identified among themselves solidarity. 

What then are the strengths of viewing nationalism in this way? Arguably, as I mentioned prior, Anderson's book revolutionised the discourse around nationalism. Like many scholars, Enric Castello (2016) finds Anderson's work as vital to escaping typical conceptions of nationalism: primarily, the strict vision of Marxists on the notion of nations, or rather the constant demonisation of nationalism. For him, it could help bring people together and should be rethought of as belonging to same categories of kinship and religion, not ideologies such as communism, liberalism or fascism. Primarily, by bringing forth ideas of nationalism as not a destructive force but that of a modern one, and the concept of the idea of nationhood being produced by nationalism, we can begin to understand and analyse the formation of the nation in different parts of the world as I will explore later. 

Most notably, the idea of the nation being a modern product helps to invigorate discussion around how the media creates and enhances this nationalism. Michael Billig's work on *Banal Nationalism* (1995) for instance helps to complement Anderson's idea of this imagined community: outlining the subtle ways in which national identity is reinforced in Western countries that is rarely commented upon. He points out that:

 The ideological habits, by which our nations are reproduced as nations, are unnamed and therefore unnoticed. The national flag hanging outside a public building in the United States attracts no special attention. It belongs to no special, sociological genus. Having no name, it cannot be identified as a problem. Nor, by implication, is the daily reproduction of the United States a problem. (1995: 6).

As Michael Skey (2008) summarizes: Billig points out how the media - from political speeches, to domestic and foreign news - helps imbue a sense of nationalism without anyone being consciously aware of it: that the use of "deictic language such as "we", "our", "us" and "here" signifies the nation" and thus creating an "us" versus "them" mentality (2008: pp. 332). We can see elements of Anderson's theory inspiring Billig's work: the conception and emphasis on the role of the media in creating a national consciousness, the idea that nationalism isn't an "extraordinary, politically charged and emotionally driven" ideology (Billig, 1995: 44) and that often it lays at the seam of modern life.

We can see Anderson invigorating the study of nationalism through subsequent studies such as that of Arjun Appadurai ()
Even those such as [[Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy]] uses aisnfaosiani

# don't forget to write this ^

But even with that said, Anderson's theory cannot be taken as a comprehensive account on how nationalism operates on a global scale. It is simply too reductive and narrow in its account of how nationalism might manifest in non-Western nations. For instance, a massive part of Anderson's theory is that religion was superseded in place by nationalism but this is too dismissive of the immense forces of religion that lingers in these global forces today. Nira Yuval Davis (2011) would point out that Anderson's belief of the nation as, in Durkheimian terms, sacred, is too simplistic. As she states:

 It denies the ... reliance on religion as a hegemonic cultural tradition which plays an important part even in states with secular constitutions ... when we view the states of the world as a whole, only a minority of them can be considered fully secular ... even nationalist movements ... relied upon these to legitimize themselves as representing 'the people' and to launch wars against the 'enemy.' (2011, pp: 124)

Indeed, nationalist movements and nationalism are steeped in heavy religious backgrounds: one only needs to look at the declaration of Jihad from Al-Qaeda to acknowledge how religious values play a significant part in nationalist movements. Even in seemingly western countries, religion plays a big part in the formation of laws. It's evident that many view the Bible as being vehemently against abortion. No matter how correct this is, when considering the overturning of Roe v. Wade, meaning that there is no constitutional right to abortion in the US or even the Texas Heartbeat Act, that bans medical abortions as soon as a heartbeat is detected, religious beliefs are in the undercurrents of government and laws.

As Nira Yuval-Davis summarises, Anderson's account does not even take into account how foreign nations may produce nationalism in a way contrary to western countries. As she paraphrases from Chatterjee's (1990) study, post-colonial nations often have a "search for 'cultural authenticity' which is expressed in religious terms". (2011, pp: 125). Could it not be argued that in this increasingly uncertain age, where the rise globalisation and insecurity in the world, through the rise of zero-hour contracts, perceived political instability, that religion could still play a vital role in comforting people? As Yuval-Davis argues, "Religions provide people with a compass and an anchor", as nationalism Anderson argued does for its subjects, "Ethnic nationalisms provide them with fixed identities and impermeable community backgrounds ... these fundamentalist identities ... provided a source of comfort, solace and even a sense of empowerment to people." (2011, pp: 129). 

As I've recalled before, there is a pressing argument that Anderson's argument is vastly too simplistic. 

Indeed, his conception of the people as a unified entity and ethnicity is wrong...

