Notes:

Partnership - Finley
Share that essay with whatever revision we've done in mind (extra revision)
3 parts - introduction, main body, conclusion

Re-writing different task.

RETREAT - short period of time, a short experience in which we draw up 'something' that transforms what we have already done

What is Finley's essay about? How is Black Feminist thought challenged the category of women?

PART 1: women is a normative characterisation that needs to be critiqued (gendered term) (politicized) - homogenous identity. Experiences differ between ideas of what it means to be a woman. Feminist thinkers are from a different strata of life - Angela Davis, at least a 1/3 of Black Female workers are chained to their jobs (emancipation). Large-scale alienation of women linking to the fact that they are not affluent and that ethnic minorities - that is when we can begin to have a holistic view of women.

PART 2:

Patricia Hill Collin's theory: black women dual-oppression by male communities and black communities. Distinct disadvantage as opposed to wealthy white woman that have no comparative base to test their assumptions around.

Blacks live in heteregenous neighbours / segregation still exists / racial solidarity along black women are breaking down as middle class black women are not feeling compelled to live in the working class. Society is becoming more stratified, not less. Identified the specificity of the situation of black women - Sojourna Truth (8 isle women speech) incredibly incised oratory performance: she cannot read or write, emblematic of that prejudice, but challenged the basis of women: "I do everything else a woman does, yet I am forced to be seen as someone more refined" - more important as it challenged the institutional inequalities of a state but the internalised inequalities of the suffrage movement. Suppressed doubt about femininity (notion of womanhood is socially and racially constructed). Du Bois' study in Philadelphia - 91% of black women confined to the domestic sphere. Angela Davis (perniciously and particularly avoided the economic disparities). Uniquely compartmentalised.

100s of years long after the emancipation proclamation, Feminism is based on the universality of the Female experience. Sara Ahmed, it's important to 'notice' things - political-labour, noticing inequalities and political emancipation. Principles of patriarchy and racial oppression. Idea that only the last few decades had the elites noticed the social strategy of women.

Nigerian woman Oreronke Oyewumi - **interesting perspective on colonialism** and how the race is a corporeal-bodily experience tangibly colonial and post-colonial phenomenon: amongst the Igbo the idea of sight was less important than hearing. Western thought and western intellectual thought have been considered over the body, that translated over the structure of the colonial society. Men identified in their mind. Seems quite artificial - genderisation of that society correlates with British correlations. Once I understand that colonialism is a process of implicit sexism (binary with a lack of regard to other).

Abu-lu-god (anthropological reading list) - moral pre-requisites of the American elites was 'liberating' women of cover - in a neo-liberal society where the West is dominated. Large constituent policy apparatus. Western powers that call for that are quite smug (quite reading list)

Conclusion: Essentially, black women long before gaining recognition are implicitly aware of the structure of oppression against their will - shown by Sojourna Truth's speech, dual oppression of that she faced and made an active stand for black women in spite of that.

Not to apply intellectual 'top-down' approaches - indeed, Bell Hooks denounces and is the pioneer of new wave Feminism and stratified racialised society it's important to recognise that.

It's the power of intersectionality: one cannot understand black women's oppression through class and gender. They occupy a unique position on the social strata, can't be reproduced anywhere and must be taken seriously. Homogenous feminism as a topic - we cannot find a homogenous black feminism (different from Black African and Black American feminism) and different pressures and a different understanding of these experiences.

---

# Exam, group thinking

Active vs Passive reading
Is this an individual account? Who are the thinkers that take Du Bois in a new direction? I am arguing this.... for example (colour line systemic intervention).

Du Bois wrote when the rise of psychology and individual emerged: people are going to *affected* by this. Somehow, there was systemic harm. Not enough, institutions of the modern nation-state, doesn't deal with 'who captures the knowledge production around race?', elite group of knowledge makers.

Global Social Theory - Gambamma ???? (name?) modern thinkers captured by institutions that were racist, the degree to which Du Bois could push past that is limited. Did Du Bois talk about black feminism? Advantage we have is that we can take from two different times: Du Bois in his moment, and where we are now in contemporary race theory.

We're not looking at society, we're taking a part of the knowledge systems. Look back: have I got all those components laid out in that introduction?

1. Making sure we're accounting for the concepts in the question
2. Make sure we're discussing the thinker that is being discussed or relevant to the question.
3. Some critical analysis of it (does it have use-value in the contemporary moment) (Making an argument, ensuring the concepts shared are confined and making sure that we are actively evidencing them)

For example, Stuart Hall (race relations in the everyday context, or in the moment of Brexit, post-Brexit) and why does that matter? Concept of the colour line in that evidenced example. Make the knowledge I am making *active*.

The definition must be explained (for example, colour line). It's important for that definition - it is different from racism itself. It's about the US.

The body of the argument tends to be the most muddled bit. We're thinking about time and space limitations. Working at a most targeted level. What we want to do is avoid 'going around', consolidating groups or a constellation of key people we are relying on to make our argument.

Structure is the same... ?

We need a solid foundation (argue first that the colour line does ABC but not D, I want to argue second, drawing from De-Silva and three answer the question)

Argument, then in the body of the essay unravelling that, using that material to engage and evidence my argument, how do you evaluate evidence that is actually useful in an essay?

Examples? Empirical evidence between opinion?

What are people not asking?

(to see if the evidence is good) Gotta look at those examples necessary, does it change the way we think about this concept? Does it make us think about it differently? For example, [[Bhambra]] - Du Bois is not a worlds system thinker. What kind of thinker produces what kind of concept? That is what is important.

Critique of liberalism: largely white politics, whiteness, EDI (equality, diversion and inclusion).

Mechanisms we used: passive vs active. Description vs analysis.

Why is the nation-state still a powerful categorization today? Two arguments (from Nik and Jasper) nation is power power / sovereign is violence. Good arguments but we have to crystalise that: why is it still essential. How do we critique the concept? Sovereign nation, sovereignty as a kind of violence (states of exemption, Arendt, sovereignty is violent, Judith Magnus, comes into contemporary stuff, we're kind of against a 'one-state' solution in the middle-east, arguing for a Federalism): small councils.  

Banal nationalism, rising authoritarianism, elite capture of Hungarian higher education (privatized, dark money) on the basis of patriotism (anti-LGBT) stuff platformed ... Do have to *define* nation, say the thinkers I'm using and then come to an argument. Nation is a post-empire unit, based on post-imperial organizations. Thus, we need the history to lay out the foundation. The purpose of it is to draw models of human exchange on capital orientation. Law. Things Sociologists look to to get notions of modern state-building and an organised building.

Race story pre-empts this question. History, definition of that concept, tell us the arguments and limitations of that argument. 

If we think of nation as a post-imperial intervention, governance around territory, born out of violence, the history of violence stems from imperialism, category (present is asking us to do the historical intervention) - the birth of the nation is the moment we sacrifice the stranger, sacrificial-stranger (Paul Ricere, the long-distance runner history-memory scholar), that the nation itself is always based on a bordering and an othering, austerity, polarity. 

Have to be careful, consolidate - remember about passive-active, have to try and refer to lectures on this, and any extended reading list (demonstrating that we're attending to the course). If we bring in new thinkers, we need to *cover* the broad range that is already there. When we do do it, we must argue that it is necessary. 

Without overusing thinkers or use thinkers the same way (use them in a different way across questions). How are thinkers relevant to each other for a question (radical intervention). 

Reference list in SOC1 is poor - deprived of lots of theory. Rather than seeing it as a sitting exam (repeat, these questions are unexpected). I would have some working essays that cut across the themes of the term

Really want to know the difference between a reflective creative angle, that would be the first - different from a reproductive, descriptive account stuff. That is the difference between a 2:1 and a 1:1. We want to be able to stand out in the cohort - taking some risks, finding evidence that is going to showcase the test of the concepts in the question. Conclusions that have unique angles but summarise it. "The actual concept of the theory doesn't have use value, here's why. Another thinker has a better approach."

Send out a message. 

Answer questions - How do thinkers cut across questions, closely related, how have we sought to critique theorists in relation to questions and concepts, what is your view of evidence and examples, what is an effective argument?

To do revisions in sections / note absents (key components), arguments, critiques, et cetera (introduction)


