Supervision!

Analysis vs Discuss: form of critique, what kind of critique we engage.

Analysis - "Societies are born unequally". Unequal in what way? Which societies?

Going one step further by recognising that we have to situate the question, and critique the thinkers we're working with to come to a new place. That's analytically than simply trying to answer the questions descriptively.

It doesn't go too far.

# Rafa 's essay

Struggle - coercive power, who decides what? For whom? The study of class is really for the study of inequality. Class to classification. Fun!

Grenfell is an outcome of history of classification. - Rafa.

# Other ideas:

Need to be impsactful. Human based, social conditions inherited through a stratified society. Concrete feedback: what else could be in my final argument that wasn't there. If we're not talking about race, where could it come from?

You can't have class without empire (example of attacking an argument, or a way to move into race-related studies.)

Drop things in? Need to 'mete' it out. You don't generally have to conclude, but you can have a final paragraph (horizons, what's next?) reflecting on the essay. Classification coming from empire.

Bourdieu's example of cultural capital may not transcend the concept of empire. What about de-colonization? Thinking about embodied culture, subcultures performing class. What about class resistance? What about methods of resistance that aren't classically seamed.

Even Savage is a bit of a classifier. How to honour a thinker? What is cultural capital in sub-groups? Teddy boys! Mods and Rockers! Teenyboppers! The Portuguese Gangsters! 

It's not as targeted as Savage and Bourdieu. Shildrick is a subculture person. Class performances are really interested. To be very targeted, we need to raise the question *what* is class, its pre-emptive framing. Both of my examples stay. We've got everything there, angled slightly differently. If this is a classification system that we need to situate class: need to be situated in place and in time.

What is class culture? It's bounded by values. Working person - moral boundaries, we know exactly what structures are violent towards me. If we set it up to have this sort of framing, there's an argument for both for or against morality and culture being attached to the classification system. To make an argument that there is moral and cultural boundaries, to do that we need to have Shildrick, Taylor to showcase how. That they're bound by the performance of the everyday: class culture, class subculture, as a way of challenging that history. Why do some groups in that struggle manage? Why don't they? Well, the Teddy Boys were children of children, maybe grandchildren (post 50s) of the White Working Class. Their fathers died in war and they grew up alone. In a sense, they were **embodying** the nation, protecting Britain - we have examples we can point out.

What do they do? What are they wearing? How do they move? What do they make? That's their performance essentially. 

Riots at notting-hill: huge racism in the labour market! Teddy boys embody the national narrative, but they are performing culture. This is why Sociology has the power it does is that we understand rather than judging them. They are alienated. They are scared. They are embodying the idea of the empire.

Class and moral values! More to follow. Doesn't mean we have to agree or disagree, just comprehend it. Class division - mods were seen as class lovers. They had their gear, they had to take middle-class drugs.

Mods were seen as aspiring at a time where mass culture and marketisation start to hit the British scene. North American television, visual media, defending the traditional working class.

Alternative argument - in performing class, you're resisting moral classification. In that sense, the question is **how**. What do we say? Are the Punks imitating and appropriating? Or are they... is? What do they feel? Do they recognise it?

What happens is that the Punks split, especially towards race lines. Punk appropriation in Far Right and heavy metal scene, holding onto empire, Great Britannia! Easy to convince, the Punky Marxists. We had largely white working class people. It's a tricky question. Is everyone trapped in a set of cultural and moral boundaries because of the history of this system?

Class performance challenges: classification tendencies to moralize and generalize ideas about what is high culture. So it is a very specific way of thinking about it. Trigger our interests in these examples, see how they reshape what we might argue. If we shape it up like that, classification structure - what comes to allow us to consider the business of *what* is class, then our entry points is different. A certain coded behaviour (Bourdieu, the habitus grounded in morality and its not appropriate to teach) because we're not performing class identity of the professional professor. 

You've got showing your brand, performing your class in a certain why (cultural capital has these elements to it and this is why it gets done) and something else (education, for France) allows you to be a representative of these things. Shifts the terms and conditions and moves us out of a strict Marxist framework into a post-Marxist notion of culture and stratification. That's where the two come together. 

The other thing we're doing (which is brave) is a bit of concept-testing: when we do this critique we are doing a nice intervention. When we say for example how Savage critiques Bourdieu, we are discussing the limits of these concepts. In that particular example Bourdieu is really good. What's the difference in terms of who is being moved? Or what is the difference between what they want from you? It's a brand that the global world order is after, and that becomes a thing that you chase. A kind of capital. An undergraduate degree of Cambridge - go networking, meet an executive, have a glass with an executive, 'what college did you go at?'. He wasn't wrong and he wrote a nice piece on 'homo academicus' - a classification of academics and their analysis. The limits here are the elite imperial systems. We use it to gauge their theories. Do they work everywhere? Can it work in the Philippines? How has our conceptions of class changed? There's so much we can come after. 

CCCs (Centre of Contemporary Culture Studies), Birmingham cultural studies huge number of people studying youth subcultures, huge numbers of people talking about class stratification and the key element of a guy called Paul Willis, how working class kids get working class jobs. He talks about people, a group of boys, presented on the wrong side of the tracks - culturally inept, go around mocking smart kids. They're going other people who are smart 'earholes' and more, essentially resisting their norms because the school culture does not correspond to their everyday life. Correspondence principle - as long as school culture, and was is progress culture, cuts across class lines there will be people alienated from school because they don't represent anything from their lives. Why are we surprised that people find school weird? There's a huge amount of working-class scholars who realises this **correspondence principle**. These kids do that and it is a form of class resistance, but it never ends well.

When using thinkers, we are also able to ensure that we have a critical line in there - one way we can understand how these boundaries exist, and they also have limitations. We do that before we think about a new thinker. We get that set up and before we set up, we don't have to repeat them all at the end. The next theoretical frame we draw on to continue the argument helps us respond to these critiques. By the time we get to the argument, we come back to the front end and move - idea of classification as a system, classificatory structure, kind-of say 'this is how we evidence cultural and moral boundaries exist and must be challenged and helps us justify both. We can have this horizon in place'. Where does this leave us? Class on its own really, truly, misses a point of colonialism, often framed in the knowledge of production of Sociology as often from certain vantage points - post-racial ideas.

Also - Western vantage point. Burmese border. How can one understand indigenous class resistance. We've got ways of thinking, an eexciting way in that we can touch on. 
